               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



    Volume I of Twelve Volumes
       Pages i-vii and 1-218




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.









This braille edition contains the entire text of the
print edition except illustrations.

Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











       BOOK JACKET INFORMATION

  Grand in scope and scale, filled with the richness
and passion of two great histories coming together,
Gai-jin is the long-awaited sixth novel in
James Clavell's magnificent Asian
Saga. Sweeping us back to the enigmatic and
elusive land of his best-selling Shogun, he
weaves an extraordinary tale of Japan, now
newly open to gai-jin--foreigners--and teeming
with contradictions as the ancient and the modern meet
in a clash of cultures, of nations, of generations.
  It is 1862, and in Japan's Foreign
Settlement of Yokohama, reverberations from an
explosive act of violence will forever alter--and
connect--the lives of the major characters. Malcolm
Struan, at twenty, is heir to the title of
tai-pan of the most powerful and bitterly contested
English trading company in the Orient, the Noble
House. Malcolm's fate, and that of his
family's legacy, become inextricably
intertwined with that of a beautiful young French woman,
Angelique Richaud. Desired by many, loved
purely and passionately by Malcolm,
Angelique will hold the future of the Noble
House in her hands.
  Intricately interwoven into the story of the
struggle for control of the Noble House is a
powerful parallel story of the Land of the Gods,
Japan, a country ripped apart by greed,
idealism, and terrorism as groups of young
xenophobic revolutionaries, ronin,
attempt to seize the Shogunate and expel
the hated gai-jin from Japan. One man, Lord
Toranaga Yoshi, a direct descendant of the
first Toranaga Shogun, attempts not
only to protect the Shogunate, but to usher
it, and Japan, into the modern age.
  Amid the brutality and heroism, the
betrayals and the stunning romance, a multilayered,
complex story unfolds. Here the dark and erotic
world of the pleasure houses--the Ladies of the
Willow World, spies, and terrorists--meets the
world of pageantry and power--monarchs and
diplomats. And here East meets West in an
inevitable collision of two equally powerful
cultures as James Clavell creates a
vibrant and authentic portrait of a time that is
gone forever ... but of a world not unlike our own.

  JAMES CLAVELL is the internationally
acclaimed author of the best-selling Asian
Saga, which has a remarkable seventeen million
copies in print. He divides his time between
Europe and America.

Delacorte Press

          THE ASIAN SAGA
            so far consists of:

1600: Shogun
1841: Tai-Pan
1862: Gai-Jin
1945: King Rat
1962: Noble House
1979: Whirlwind

















           This novel is for you,
              whoever you are
         with deep appreciation--for
         without you, the writer part of
          me would not exist. ...











  Gai-Jin, meaning foreigner, is set in
Japan, in 1862.
  It is not history but fiction. Many of the
happenings did occur according to historians and
to books of history which, of themselves, do not
necessarily always relate what truly
happened. Nor is it about any real person who
lived or is supposed to have lived, nor about any
real company. Kings and queens and emperors are
correctly named, as are a few generals and other
exalted persons. Apart from these I have played with
history--the where and how and who and why and when of
it--to suit my own reality and, perhaps, to tell the
real history of what came to pass.



































               GAI-JIN

             BOOK ONE

                  

              YOKOHAMA

    14th September 1862:
  The panic-stricken girl was galloping full
speed back towards the coast, half a mile
ahead, along footpaths that led precariously through
the rice swamps and paddy fields. The afternoon
sun bore down. She rode sidesaddle and though
normally expert, today she could hardly keep her
balance. Her hat had vanished and her green
riding habit, the height of Parisian fashion,
was ripped by brambles and speckled with blood,
tawny fair hair streaming in the wind.
  She whipped the pony faster. Now she could see
the tiny hovels of the Yokohama fishing village
clustering the high fence and canals that enclosed the
Foreign Settlement and spires of the two small
churches within and knew, thankfully, in the bay beyond
were British, French, American and Russian
merchantmen and a dozen warships, both steam and
sail.
  Faster. Over narrow wooden bridges and
canals and irrigation ditches that crisscrossed
the paddy and swamps. Her pony was lathered with
sweat, a deep wound on his shoulder and tiring
rapidly. He shied. A bad moment but she
recovered and now she swerved onto the path that led
through the village to the bridge over the encircling
canal and to the main gate and the samurai guard
house, and Japanese Customs House.
  The two-sworded samurai sentries saw her
coming and moved to intercept but she charged through them into the
wide main street of the Settlement proper on the
seafront. One of the samurai guards rushed for
an officer.
  She reined in, panting. "Au secours
... a l'aide, help!"
  The promenade was almost deserted, most of the
inhabitants at siesta or yawning in their
countinghouses, or dallying in the Pleasure Houses
outside the fence.
  "Help!" she called out again and again and the few
men spread along its length, British traders
and off-duty soldiers and sailors mostly, some
Chinese servants, looked up startled.
  "God Almighty, look there! It's the
French girl ..."
  "What's amiss? Christ, look at her
clothes ..."
  "Cor, it's her, the smasher, Angel
Tits, arrived couple of weeks ago ..."
  "That's right, Angelique ... Angelique
Beecho or Reecho, some Frog name like that.
..."
  "My God, look at the blood!"
  Everyone began converging on her, except the
Chinese who, wise after millennia of sudden
trouble, vanished. Faces began to appear in
windows.
  "Charlie, fetch Sir William on the
double!"
  "Christ Almighty, look at her pony,
poor bugger will bleed to death, get the vet," a
corpulent trader called out. "And you, soldier,
quick, get the General, and the Frog, she's his ward
--oh for God's sake the French Minister,
hurry!" Impatiently he pointed at a
single-story house flying the French flag.
"Hurry!" he bellowed, the soldier rushed off,
and he trundled for her as fast as he could. Like
all traders he wore a top hat and woolen
frock coat, tight pants, boots, and sweated
in the sun. "What on earth happened, Miss
Angelique?" he said, grabbing her bridle,
aghast at the dirt and blood that speckled her
face and clothes and hair. "Are you hurt?"
  "Moi, non ... no, I think not but we were
attacked ... Japanners attacked us." She
was trying to catch her breath and stop shaking, still in
terror, and pushed the hair out of her face.
Urgently she pointed inland westwards, Mount
Fuji vaguely on the horizon. "Back there,
quick, they need, need help!"
  Those nearby were appalled and noisily began
relaying the half news to others and asking questions:
Who? Who was attacked? Are they French or
British? Attacked? Where? Two-sword
bastards again! Where the hell did this happen ...
  Questions overlaid other questions and gave her no time
to answer, nor could she yet, coherently, her
chest heaving, everyone pressing closer, crowding
her. More and more men poured into the street putting on
coats and hats, many already armed with pistols and
muskets, a few with the latest American
breech-loading rifles. One of these men,
a big-shouldered, bearded Scot, ran down the
steps of an imposing two-story building. Over
the portal was "Struan and Company." He
shoved his way through to her in the uproar.
  "Quiet for God's sake!" he shouted, and in
the sudden lull, "Quick, tell us what happened.
Where's young Mr. Struan?"
  "Oh Jamie, je ... I, I ..." The
girl made a desperate effort to collect
herself, disoriented. "Oh mon Dieu!"
  He reached up and patted her shoulder like a child,
to gentle her, adoring her, like all of them.
"Don't worry, you're safe now, Miss
Angelique. Take your time. Give her some
room for God's sake!" Jamie McFay was
thirty-nine, chief manager of Struan's in
Japan. "Now, tell us what happened."
  She brushed away the tears, her tawny hair
askew. "We ... we were attacked, attacked
by samurai," she said, her voice tiny and accent
pleasing. Everyone craned to hear better. "We were
... we were on the, on the big road ..." Again
she pointed inland, "It was there."
  "The Tokaido?"
  "Yes, that's it, the Tokaido ..." This
great coastal trunk toll road, a little over a
mile west of the Settlement, joined the
Shogun's forbidden capital, Yedo, twenty
miles northwards, to the rest of Japan, also
forbidden to all foreigners. "We were ... riding.
..." She stopped and then the words poured out:
"Mr. Canterbury, and Phillip Tyrer and
Malcolm--Mr. Struan--and me, we were riding
along the road and then there were some ... a long line
of samurai with banners and we wait to let them
pass then we ... then two of them rush us, they
wound Monsieur Mr. Canterbury, charge
Malcolm--Mr. Struan--who had his pistol out
and Phillip who shout me to run away, to get
help." The shaking began again. "Quick, they need
help!"
  Already men were rushing for mounts, and more guns.
Angry shouts began: "Someone get the troops
..."
  "Samurai got John Canterbury,
Struan, and that young chap Tyrer, they've been
chopped on the Tokaido."
  "Christ, she says samurai have killed some of
our lads!"
  "Where did this happen?" Jamie
McFay called out above the noise, curbing his
frantic impatience. "Can you describe the
place where this happened, exactly where?"
  "By the roadside, before Kana ... Kana
something."
  "Kanagawa?" he asked, naming a small
way station and fishing village on the Tokaido,
a mile across the bay, three odd miles
by coastal road.
  "Oui--yes. Kanagawa! Hurry!"
  Horses were being led out of the Struan stables,
saddled and ready. Jamie slung a rifle over
his shoulder. "Don't worry, we'll find them
quickly. But Mr. Struan? Did you see if he
got away--if he was hurt?"
  "Non. I saw nothing, just the beginning, poor
Mr. Canterbury, he ... I was riding beside
him when they ..." The tears flooded. "I did
not look back, I obeyed without ... and came
to get help."
  Her name was Angelique Richaud. She was just
eighteen. This was the first time she had been outside
the fence.
  McFay jumped into the saddle and whirled
away. Christ Almighty, he thought in anguish,
we haven't had any trouble for a year or more,
otherwise I'd never have let them go. I'm
responsible, Malcolm's heir apparent and
I'm responsible! In the Name of God, what the
hell happened?

  Without delay, McFay, a dozen or so
traders, a Dragoon officer with three of his
lancers found John Canterbury on the side
of the Tokaido but viewing him was more difficult.
He was decapitated and parts of his limbs
scattered nearby. Ferocious sword cuts were
patterned all over his body, almost any one of which
would have been a death blow. There was no sign of
Tyrer and Struan, or the column of samurai.
None of the passers knew anything about the murder,
who had done it, or when or why.
  "Would the other two have been kidnapped,
Jamie?" an American asked queasily.
  "I don't know, Dmitri." McFay tried
to get his brain working. "Someone better go back and
tell Sir William and get ... and bring a
shroud or coffin." White-faced he studied the
passing crowds who carefully did not look in his
direction but observed everything.
  The well-kept, beaten earth roadway was
massed with disciplined streams of travellers to and from
Yedo that one day would be called Tokyo. Men,
women and children of all ages, rich and poor, all
Japanese but for an occasional long-gowned
Chinese. Predominately men, all wearing
kimonos of various styles and modesty, and many
different hats of cloth and straw. Merchants,
half-naked porters, orange-robed Buddhist
priests, farmers going to or coming from market,
itinerant soothsayers, scribes, teachers and
poets. Many litters and palanquins of all
kinds for people or goods with two, four, six or
eight bearers. The few strutting samurai
amongst the crowds stared at them balefully as they
passed.
  "They know who did it, all of them," McFay
said.
  "Sure. Matyeryebitz!" Dmitri
Syborodin, the American, a heavyset,
brown-haired man of thirty-eight, roughly
clothed and a friend of Canterbury, was seething.
"It'd be goddam easy to force one of them." Then
they noticed a dozen or so samurai standing in a
group down the road, watching them. Many had bows
and all Westerners knew what adept archers
samurai were.
  "Not so easy, Dmitri," McFay said.
  Pallidar, the young Dragoon officer said
crisply, "Very easy to deal with them, Mr.
McFay, but ill-advised without permission--
unless of course they attack us. You're quite
safe." Settry Pallidar detailed a
dragoon to fetch a detachment from the camp, with a
coffin, the American visibly irritated by his
imperiousness. "You'd better search the nearby
countryside. When my men arrive they'll
assist. More than likely the other two are wounded
somewhere."
  McFay shuddered, motioned at the corpse.
"Or like him?"
  "Possibly, but let's hope for the best. You
three take that side, the rest of you spread out
and--"
  "Hey, Jamie," Dmitri interrupted
deliberately, hating officers and uniforms and
soldiers, particularly British ones. "How
about you and me going on to Kanagawa--maybe
someone in our Legation knows something."
  Pallidar disregarded the hostility,
understanding it, well acquainted with the American's
fine service record. Dmitri was an
American of Cossack extraction, an ex
cavalry officer of the U.s. Army, whose grandfather
had been killed fighting the British in the
American War of 1812. "Kanagawa is a
good idea, Mr. McFay," he said. "They should
certainly know what big procession of samurai
passed through and the sooner we find out who the
culprit is the better. The attack must have been
ordered by one of their kings or princes. This time we
can peg the bastard and God help him."
  "God rot all bastards," Dmitri said
pointedly.
  Again the resplendently uniformed Captain did
not provoke but did not let it pass. "Quite right,
Mr. Syborodin," he said easily. "And any
man who calls me a bastard better quickly get
himself a second, a pistol or sword, a shroud
and someone to bury him. Mr. McFay, you'll have
plenty of time before sunset. I'll stay here
until my men return, then we'll join the
search. If you hear anything in Kanagawa,
please send me word." He was twenty-four and
worshipped his regiment. With barely concealed disdain
he looked at the motley group of traders.
"I suggest the rest of you ... gentlemen ...
begin the search, spread out but stay in visual
contact. Brown, you go with that group and search those
woods. Sergeant, you're in charge."
  "Yessir. Come on, you lot."
  McFay took off his coat and spread it over
the body, then remounted. With his American friend he
hurried northwards toward Kanagawa, a mile
away.
  Now the dragoon was alone. Coldly he sat
on his horse near the corpse and watched the
samurai. They stared back. One moved his bow,
perhaps a threat, perhaps not. Pallidar remained
motionless, his sabre loose in its scabbard.
Sunlight sparked off his gold braid.
Pedestrians on the Tokaido hurried
by silently, afraid. His horse pawed the ground
nervously, jingling the harness.
  This isn't like the other attacks, the lone
attacks, he thought with growing anger. There's going
to be hell to pay, attacking those four, a woman
amongst them, and killing an Englishman so
foully. This means war.
                                   
  A few hours ago the four of them had ridden out
of the main gate, past the Customs House,
casually saluted the samurai guards who bowed
perfunctorily, and trotted leisurely inland
along meandering paths, heading for the Tokaido.
All were expert riders, their ponies nimble.
  In Angelique's honor, they wore their
best top hats and riding clothes, and were the envy of
every man in the Settlement: one hundred and
seventeen resident Europeans, diplomats,
traders, butchers, shopkeepers, blacksmiths,
shipwrights, armorers, adventurers, gamblers and
many ne'er-do-wells and remittance men, most of
them British, the clerks Eurasian or
Chinese, a few Americans, French, Dutch,
Germans, Russians, Australians and one
Swiss; and amongst them three women, all
matrons, two British, wives of traders,
the last a madam in Drunk Town as the
low-class quarter was called. No children. Fifty
to sixty Chinese servants.
  John Canterbury, a good-looking,
craggy-faced British trader acted as their
guide. The purpose of the excursion was to show
Phillip Tyrer the way by land to Kanagawa where
meetings with Japanese officials took place
from time to time, and well within the agreed Settlement
area. Tyrer, just twenty-one, had arrived
yesterday from London via Peking and Shanghai,
a newly appointed student interpreter to the
British Legation.
  This morning, overhearing the two of them in the
Club, Malcolm Struan had said, "May
I come along, Mr. Canterbury, Mr.
Tyrer? It's a perfect day for sightseeing,
I'd like to ask Miss Richaud to join us--she
hasn't seen any of the country yet."
  "We'd be honored, Mr. Struan."
Canterbury was blessing his luck. "You're both
welcome. The ride's good though there's not much
to see--for a lady."
  "Eh?"' Tyrer had said.
  "Kanagawa's been a busy post village
and stopover place for travellers to and from Yedo for
centuries, so we're told. It's well
stocked with Teahouses, that's what most brothels
are called here. Some of them are well worth a
visit though we're not always welcome like at our
own Yoshiwara across the swamp."
  "Whorehouses?"' Tyrer had said.
  The other two had laughed at his look. "The
very same, Mr. Tyrer," Canterbury had
said. "But they're not like the doss houses, or
brothels in London, or anywhere else in the
world, they're special. You'll soon find out,
though here the custom is to have your own doxy, if you
can afford it."
  "I'll never be able to do that," Tyrer said.
  Canterbury laughed. "Maybe you will.
Thank God the rate of exchange favors us,
oh my word! That old Yankee Townsend
Harris was a canny bastard." He beamed at
the thought. Harris was the first American
Consul-General appointed two years after
Commodore Perry had forced the opening of Japan
to the outside world, first in '53, then '56 with his
four Black Ships--the first steamers seen in
Japanese waters. Four years ago, after
years of negotiating, Harris arranged
Treaties later ratified by major Powers that
granted access to certain ports. The Treaties
also fixed a very favorable rate of exchange between
silver Mex--Mexican silver dollars, the
universal coin of exchange and trade in Asia
--and Japanese gold oban, whereby if you
changed Mex for oban and later exchanged them for
Mex, you could double or triple your money.
  "An early lunch then off we go,"
Canterbury said. "We'll be back in good time
for supper, Mr. Struan."
  "Excellent. Perhaps you'd both join me in
our company dining room? I'm giving a small
party for Mademoiselle Richaud."
  "Thank you kindly. I trust the tai-pan's
better?"'
  "Yes, much better, my father's quite
recovered."
  That's not what we heard in yesterday's mails,
John Canterbury had thought worriedly, for
what affected the Noble House--the nickname by which
Struan and Company was known the world over--affected
them all. Rumor is your Old Man's had
another stroke. Joss. Never mind, it's not
often a man like me gets the chance to chat to a real
tai-pan-to-be, or an angel like her.
This's going to be a great day!
  And once en route, he became even more
affable. "Oh, Mr. Struan, you ... are you
staying long?"
  "Another week or so, then home
to Hong Kong." Struan was the tallest and
strongest of the three. Pale blue eyes, long
reddy-brown hair tied in a queue, and old for
his twenty years. "No reason to stay, we're in
such good hands with Jamie McFay. He's done
a sterling job for us, opening up Japan."
  "He's a nob, Mr. Struan, and that's a
fact. Best there is. The lady will leave with you?"
  "Ah, Miss Richaud. I do believe
she'll return with me--I hope so. Her father
asked me to keep an eye on her though,
temporarily, she's the French Minister's ward
while she's here," he said lightly, pretending not
to notice the sudden gleam, or that Tyrer was deep
in conversation with Angelique in French that he himself
spoke hesitantly, and already under her spell.
Don't blame him, Canterbury, or anyone,
he thought amused, then spurred forward to give the
others room as the path ahead became a
bottleneck.
  The terrain was flat but for bamboo thickets,
though it was wooded here and there--the trees already
autumn tinged. There were many duck and other game
fowl. Paddy fields and rice swamps being
cultivated intensively, and land reclaimed.
Narrow pathways. Streams everywhere. The stench of
human manure, Japan's only fertilizer,
ever present. Fastidiously, the girl and Tyrer
held scented handkerchiefs to their noses, though a
cooling breeze came off the sea to take away
most of the stink and the dregs of summer's humidity,
mosquitoes, flies and other pests. The far
hills, densely forested, were a brocade of reds
and golds and browns--beech, scarlet and yellow
larch, maples, wild rhododendrons, cedar and
pines.
  "It's beautiful there, isn't it, Monsieur
Tyrer? A shame we can't see Mount Fuji
clearer."
  "Oui, demain, il est la! Mais
mon Dieu, Mademoiselle, quelle
senteur," what a smell, Tyrer replied
happily in fluent French--an essential
language for any diplomat.
  Casually Canterbury dropped back
alongside her, neatly displacing the younger man.
"Are you all right, Mademoiselle?"
  "Oh yes, thank you, but it would be good
to gallop a little. I'm so happy to be outside
the fence." Since she arrived two weeks
ago with Malcolm Struan on the bimonthly
Struan steamer she had been closely chaperoned.
  And quite right too, Canterbury was thinking, with
all the riffraff and scum of Yokohama, and
let's be honest, the odd pirate sniffing around.
"On the way back you can take a turn around the
racetrack if you like."
  "Oh, that would be wonderful, thank you."
  "Your English is just wonderful, Miss
Angelique, and your accent delightful. You were in
school in England?"
  "La, Mr. Canterbury," she laughed and a
wave of heat went through him, the quality of her
skin and beauty exhilarating. "I've never been
to your country. My young brother and I were brought up
by my aunt Emma and Uncle Michel, she was
English, and refused always to learn French. She
was more a mother than an aunt." A shadow crossed
her. "That was after my mother died birthing my brother
and father left for Asia."
  "Oh, sorry about that."
  "It was a long time ago, Monsieur, and I
think of my darling aunt Emma as Mama." Her
pony tugged at her reins. She corrected him
without thought. "I was very lucky."
  "This's your first visit to Asia?" he
asked, knowing the answer and much more, wanting to keep
her talking. The snippets of information about her,
gossip, rumors had sped from smitten man
to smitten man.
  "Yes it is." Again her smile lit up his
being. "My father's a China trader in your
Colony of Hong Kong, I'm visiting him for the
season. He's a friend of Monsieur Seratard
here, and kindly arranged this visit for me. You
may know him, Guy Richaud, of Richaud
Freres?"
  "Of course, a fine gentleman," he
answered politely, never having met him, knowing
only what others had told him: that Guy
Richaud was a philandering, minor foreigner who had
been there for a few years, scratching a living.
"We're all honored that you're visiting us here.
Perhaps I may host a dinner in your honor, at
the Club?"
  "Thank you, I will ask my host, Monsieur
Seratard." Angelique saw Struan glance
back, up ahead, and she waved gaily. "Mr.
Struan was kind enough to escort me here."
  "Really?" As if we didn't know,
Canterbury thought, and wondered about her, how you
could catch and hold and afford such a treasure,
wondered about the brilliant young Struan who could
afford it, wondered too about rumors that the
struggle for dominance between Struan's and their major
trading rival, Brock and Sons, was rising
again, something to do with the American civil war that had
started last year.
  The pickings are going to be huge, nothing like a
war for business, both sides already going at each
other like maniacs, the South more than a match for the
Union ...
  "Angelique, look!" Struan reined in,
pointing. Ahead a hundred yards, down the
small rise, was the main road. They came up
beside him.
  "I never thought the Tokaido would be this big,
or so crowded," Phillip Tyrer said.
  Except for a few ponies, everyone was on
foot. "But ... but where are the carriages, or
tumbrils or carts? And more than that," she burst
out, "where are the beggars?"
  Struan laughed. "That's easy,
Angelique. Like almost everything else here they're
forbidden." He shifted his top hat to a more
jaunty angle. "No wheels of any sort are
allowed in Japan. Shogun's orders.
None!"
  "But why?"
  "It's one sure way of keeping the rest of the
population in order, isn't it?"
  "Yes indeed," Canterbury laughed
sardonically, then motioned towards the road. "And
add to that, every Tom, Dick or Mary there, high
or low, has to carry travel papers, permission
to travel, even to be outside their own village,
same for princes or paupers. And notice the
samurai--they're the only ones in all Japan
who can carry weapons."
  "But without proper stagecoaches and railways,
how can the country possibly work?" Tyrer was
perplexed.
  "It works Japan style," Canterbury
told him. "Never forget Jappers have only one
way of doing things. Only one. Their way.
Jappers are not like anyone else, certainly not like
Chinese, eh, Mr. Struan?"
  "Indeed they are not."
  "No wheels anywhere, Miss. So everything,
all goods, food, fish, meat, building
supplies, every sack of rice, stick of wood,
bale of cloth, box of tea, keg of gunpowder
--every man, woman or child who can afford it--has
to be carried on someone's back--or go by boat,
which means by sea 'cause they've no navigable
rivers at all, so we're told, just thousands of
streams."
  "But what about the Settlement? Wheels they are
allowed there, Mr. Canterbury."
  "Yes, indeed they are, Miss, we've all
the wheels we want though their officials bitched
like bloody ... sorry, Miss," he added
quickly, embarrassed. "We're not used to ladies
in Asia. As I was saying, Japper
officials, they're called Bakufu, they're like
our civil service, they argued about it for years
until our Minister told them to get from---- to,
er, to forget it because our Settlement was our
Settlement! As to beggars, they're forbidden
too."
  She shook her head and the feather on her hat
danced merrily. "It sounds impossible. Paris,
she is ... Paris is filled with them, everywhere in
Europe, it's impossible to stop the begging.
Mon Dieu, Malcolm, what about your Hong
Kong?"
  "Hong Kong's the worst," Malcolm
Struan said, smiling.
  "But how can they forbid begging and beggars?"
Tyrer asked, perplexed. "Mademoiselle
Angelique is right of course. All
Europe's a begging bowl. London's the
richest city in the world but it's inundated."
  Canterbury smiled strangely. "There're
no beggars because the Almighty Tycoon, the
Shogun, king of the lot, says no begging so it's
law. Any samurai can test his blade on any
beggar at any time--or on any other bugger ...
pardon ... or anyone else for that matter so
long as he's not samurai. If you're caught
begging you're breaking the law, so it's into the
slammer, prison, and once there, the only
penalty's death. That's law also."
  "None other?" the girl said, shocked.
  "'fraid not. So Japanners are untoward
law-abiding." Again Canterbury laughed
sardonically and looked back at the twisting
road, halting abruptly half a mile away
for a wide shallow stream that every person had to ford or
be carried over. On the far bank was a
barrier. There, they bowed and presented papers to the
inevitable samurai guards.
  Bloody bastards, he thought, hating them but
loving the fortune he was making here--and his
lifestyle that centered around Akiko, now his
mistress of a year. Ah yes, luv, you're the
best, most special, most loving in all the
Yoshiwara.
  "Look," she said. On the Tokaido they
could see groups of passersby had stopped and were
pointing in their direction, gaping and talking loudly
above the ever present hum of movement--hatred on
many faces, and fear.
  "Pay no attention to them, Miss, we're just
strange to them, that's all, they don't know
better. You're probably the first civilized
woman they've ever seen." Canterbury pointed
north. "Yedo's that way, about twenty miles.
Of course it's off limits."
  "Except for official delegations," Tyrer
said.
  "That's right, with permission which Sir
William hasn't got once, not since I've
been here and I was one of the first. Rumor has it that
Yedo's twice as big as London, Miss, that
there's over a million souls there and
fantastical rich, and the Shogun's castle the
biggest in the world."
  "Could that be a lie, Mr. Canterbury?"
Tyrer asked.
  The trader beamed. "They're powerful liars,
that's the God's truth, Mr. Tyrer, the best that
have ever been, they make the Chinee seem the
Angel Gabriel. I don't envy you having
to interpret what they say which sure as God made
periwinkles won't be what they mean!" Normally
he was not so talkative but he was determined
to impress her and Malcolm Struan with his knowledge
while he had the opportunity. All this talking
had given him a vast thirst. In his side
pocket was a thin silver flask but he knew,
regretfully, that it would be bad manners to swig
some of the whisky in front of her.
  "Could be we get permission to go there,
Malcolm?" she was saying. "To this Yedo?"
  "I doubt it. Why not ask Monsieur
Seratar'?"
  "I shall." She noticed that he had pronounced
the name correctly, dropping the d as she had
taught him. Good, she thought, her eyes
drawn back to the Tokaido. "Where does she
end, the road?"
  After a curious pause, Canterbury said,
"We don't know. The whole country's a mystery
and it's clear the Jappers want to keep it that
way and don't like us, any of us. They call us
gai-jin, foreign persons. Another word is
I-jin meaning "different person." Don't
know the difference 'cepting I'm told gai-jin's
not so polite." He laughed. "Either way, they
don't like us. And we are different--or they are."
He lit a cheroot. "After all, they kept
Japan closed tighter than a gnat's ...
closed for nigh on two and a half centuries
until Old Mutton Chops Perry bust her
open nine years ago," he said with admiration.
"Rumor says the Tokaido ends in a big
city, a kind of sacred city called Keeotoh,
where their chief priest--called the Mikado--
lives. It's so special, and sacred, we're
told the city's off limits to all but a few
special Japanners."
  "Diplomats are allowed to travel inland,"
Tyrer said sharply. "The Treaty permits it,
Mr. Canterbury."
  The trader eased off the beaver topper of which he
was inordinately proud, mopped his brow and
decided that he would not let the young man spoil his
air of bonhommie. Cocky young bastard, with your
hoity-toity voice, he thought. I could break
you in two and not even fart. "It depends how you
interpret the Treaty, and if you want to keep your
head on your shoulders. I wouldn't advise going
outside the agreed safe area, that's a few
miles north and south and inland, whatever the Treaty
says--not yet, not without a regiment or two."
In spite of his resolve, the swell of the
girl's full breasts under the green, formfitting
jacket mesmerized him. "We're penned in here
but it's not bad. Same at our Settlement at
Nagasaki, two hundred leagues westward."
  ""Leagues"? I don't understand," she said,
hiding her amusement and pleasure at the lust
surrounding her. "Please?"
  Tyrer said importantly, "A league is
approximately three miles,
Mademoiselle." He was tall and lithe, not
long out of university, and besotted by her blue
eyes and Parisian elegance. "You, er, you were
saying, Mr. Canterbury?"
  The trader tore his attention off her bosom.
"Just that it won't be much better when the other
ports are opened. Soon, very soon we'll have
to break out of them too if we're to really trade,
one way or t'other."
  Tyrer glanced at him sharply. "You mean
war?"
  "Why not? What are fleets for? Armies? It
works fine in India, China, everywhere else.
We're the British Empire, the biggest and
best that's ever been on earth. We're here
to trade and meanwhile we can give them proper
laws and order and proper civilization."
Canterbury looked back at the road, soured
by the animosity there. "Ugly lot, aren't they,
Miss?"
  "Mon Dieu, I do wish they wouldn't stare
so."
  "'fraid you just have to get used to it. It's the
same everywhere. As Mr. Struan says, Hong
Kong's the worst. Even so, Mr. Struan,"
he said with sudden esteem, "I don't mind
telling you what we need here is our own island,
our own Colony, not a rotten, smelly mile
strip of festering coast that's indefensible,
subject to attack and blackmail at any
moment if it weren't for our fleet! We should
take an island just like your granddad took Hong
Kong, bless him."
  "Perhaps we will," Malcolm Struan said
confidently, warmed by the memory of his famous
ancestor, the tai-pan, Dirk Struan,
founder of their company and main founder of the Colony
twenty-odd years ago in '41.
  Without being aware of what he was doing,
Canterbury slipped out his small flask,
tipped it back and drank, then wiped his mouth with the
back of his hand and slid the flask away.
"Let's go on. Best I lead, single file
where necessary, forget the Jappers! Mr. Struan,
perhaps you'd ride alongside the young lady and Mr.
Tyrer, you keep the rear." Very pleased with himself,
he spurred his pony into a brisk walk.
  As Angelique came alongside,
Struan's eyes crinkled in a smile. He had
been openly in love with her from the first moment he
had seen her four months ago in Hong Kong, the
first day she arrived--to take the island by storm.
Fair hair, perfect skin, deep blue eyes
with a pleasing upturned nose in an oval
face that was in no way pretty but possessed a
strange, breathtaking attractiveness, very
Parisian, her innocence and youth overlaid with a
perceptible, constant, though unconscious
sensuality that begged to be assuaged. And this in a
world of men without eligible wives, without much hope
of finding one in Asia, certainly never like her.
Many of the men rich, a few of them merchant
princes. "Pay no attention to the natives,
Angelique," he whispered, "they're just awed
by you."
  She grinned. Like an Empress, she bowed her
head. "Merci, Monsieur, vous etes
tr`es aimable."
  Struan was very content and now, very sure. Fate,
joss, God threw us together, he thought elated,
planning when he would ask her father's permission
to marry. Why not Christmas?
  Christmas will be perfect. We'll marry in the
spring and live in the Great House on the Peak in
Hong Kong. I know Mother and Father already adore
her, my God, I hope he really is better.
We'll give a huge Christmas party.
  Once on the road they made good progress,
taking care not to impede traffic. But, whether they
liked it or not, their unexpected presence and, for the
vast majority of incredulous Japanese who had
never seen people of this size and shape and coloring,
particularly the girl--along with their top hats and
frock coats, stovepipe trousers and riding
boots, and her boots and riding habit and top
hat with its saucy feather, and riding sidesaddle
--inevitably created traffic jams.
  Both Canterbury and Struan watched those on
the road carefully as the oncomers swirled past,
around them, though always giving way to their progress.
Neither man sensed or expected any danger.
Angelique kept close, pretending to ignore
the guffaws and gaping and the occasional hand that tried
to touch her, shocked at the way many men carelessly
tucked up their kimonos exposing their skimpy
loincloths and ample nakedness: "Dearest
Colette, you'll never believe me," she
thought, continuing the letter she would complete tonight to her
best friend in Paris, "but vast majority of the
legions of porters on the public highway
wear ONLY these tiny loincloths that hide almost
nothing in front and become a thin string between
the buttocks behind! I swear it's true, and I
can report that many of the natives are quite
hairy though most of their parts are small. I
wonder if Malcolm ..."
  She felt herself flush. "The capital,
Phillip," she said, making conversation, "it is
truly forbidden?"
  "Not according to the Treaty." Tyrer was vastly
pleased. Only a few minutes and she had
dropped the Monsieur. "The Treaty arranged
for all Legations to be in Yedo, the capital.
I was told we evacuated Yedo last year after
the attack on ours. Safer to be at
Yokohama under the guns of the fleet."
  "Attack? What attack?"
  "Oh some madmen called ronin--they're some
kind of outlaw, assassins--a dozen of them
attacked our Legation in the middle of the night.
The British Legation! Can you imagine the gall!
The devils killed a sergeant and a sentry ..."
  He stopped as Canterbury swung off the
roadway and reined in and pointed with his riding
crop. "Look there!"
  They halted beside him. Now they could see the
tall, thin banners held aloft by the ranks of
samurai tramping around a bend towards them, a
few hundred yards ahead. All travellers were
scattering, bundles and palanquins hastily
thrown to the ground, well out of the way, riders
dismounting hurriedly, then everyone knelt on the
sides of the roadway with heads bowed to the packed
earth, men women children, and stayed motionless. Only
the few samurai remained standing. As the cortege
passed, they bowed deferentially.
  "Who is it, Phillip?" Angelique
asked excitedly. "Can you read their signs?"
  "Sorry, no, not yet, Mademoiselle.
They say it takes years to read and write their
script." Tyrer's happiness had evaporated
at the thought of so much work ahead.
  "It is the Shogun perhaps?"
  Canterbury laughed. "No chance of that. If
it was him they'd have this whole area cordoned off.
They say he has a hundred thousand samurai
at his slightest beck. But it'll be someone
important, a king."
  "What shall we do when they pass?" she asked.
  "We'll give them the royal salute,"
Struan said. "We'll doff our hats and give
him three cheers. What will you do?"
  "Me, cheri?" She smiled, liking him very
much, remembering what her father had said before
she had left Hong Kong for Yokohama:
"Encourage this Malcolm Struan, but with care,
my little cabbage. I have already, discreetly. He
would make a marvelous match for you, that's why I
advocate this sightseeing trip to Yokohama,
unchaperoned, providing he escorts you in one of
.his ships. In three days you're eighteen, time
you were married. I know he's barely twenty and young
for you, but he's smart, the eldest son, he'll
inherit the Noble House in a year or so--it's
rumored his father, Culum, the tai-pan, is much
sicker than the company publicly allow."
  "But he's British," she had said
thoughtfully. "You hate them, Papa, and say we
should hate them. You do, don't you?"'
  "Yes, little cabbage, but not publicly.
Britain's the richest country in the world, the most
powerful, in Asia they're king, and Struan's the
Noble House--Richaud Freres are small.
We would benefit immensely if we had their
French business. Suggest it to him."
  "Oh I couldn't Papa, that would be ... I
couldn't, Papa."
  "You're a woman now, not a child my pet.
Beguile him, then he will suggest it himself. Our
future depends on you. Soon Malcolm
Struan will be the tai-pan. And you, you could share it
all ..."
  Of course I would adore such a husband, she
thought, how wise Papa is! How wonderful to be
French, therefore superior. It's easy to like, perhaps
even to love this Malcolm with his strange eyes and
young old looks. Oh I do so hope he asks
me.
  She sighed and turned her attention to the
present. "I will bow my head as we do in the
Bois to His Majesty, the emperor Louis
Napoleon. What is it, Phillip?"
  "Perhaps we'd better turn back," Tyrer
said uneasily. "Everyone says they're touchy
about us near their princes."
  "Nonsense," Canterbury said. "There's no
danger, never has been a mob attack--this
isn't like India, or Africa or China. As
I said, Japanners are mighty law-abiding.
We're well within the Treaty limit and we'll
do as we always do, just let them pass, raise your
titfer politely as you would to any potentate,
then we'll go on. You're armed, Mr.
Struan?"
  "Of course."
  "I'm not," Angelique said, a little
petulantly, watching the banners that now were
barely a hundred yards away. "I think women
should carry pistols if men do."
  They were all shocked. "Perish that thought.
Tyrer?"
  Feeling awkward Tyrer showed Canterbury the
small derringer. "It was a going-away present from
my father. But I've never fired it."
  "You won't need to, it's only the lone
samurai you have to watch, the ones or twos, the
anti-foreign fanatics. Or the ronins," then
added without thinking, "Not to worry, we haven't had
any trouble for a year or more."
  "Trouble? What trouble?" she asked.
  "Nothing," he said, not wanting to concern her and
trying to cover the slip. "A few attacks by a
few fanatics, or two, nothing important."
  She frowned. "But Monsieur Tyrer said there
was a mass attack on your British Legation and
some soldiers were killed. That's not important?"
  "That was important." Canterbury smiled
thinly at Tyrer who read the message clearly:
you're a bloody idiot to tell a lady anything
of any importance! "But they were an isolated
gang of cutthroats. The Shogunate
bureaucracy have sworn they'll catch them and
punish them."
  His voice sounded convincing, but he was wondering
how much of the truth Struan and Tyrer knew:
five men murdered on the streets of Yokohama
in their first year. The next year two
Russians, an officer and a sailor from a
Russian man-of-war, hacked to death, again in
Yokohama. A few months later two Dutch
merchants. Then the young interpreter at the
British Legation in Kanagawa stabbed from behind and
left to bleed to death. Heusken, the Secretary
of the American Mission, butchered into a dozen
pieces while riding home after a dinner party at
the Prussian Legation. And last year a
British soldier and sergeant cut down outside
the Consul General's bedroom!
  Every murder premeditated and unprovoked, he
thought, incensed, and committed by a two-sworder.
Never once was any offense given--and worst of
all, never once has any bastard been caught
and punished by the Shogun's all-powerful
Bakufu, however much our Legation Heads
screamed, and however much the Jappers promised.
Our leaders are a bloody bunch of stupid
bastards! They should have ordered up the fleet at
once and blown Yedo to hell, then all the terror
would stop, we could sleep safe in our beds without
guards, and walk our streets, any streets,
without fear when any samurai's nearby.
Diplomats are anus eaters and this young
popinjay a perfect specimen.
  Sourly he watched the banners, trying
to decipher the characters. Behind the cortege, once it
had completely passed, travellers picked
themselves up and went on again. Those going the same
way as the column, followed at a judicious
distance.
  It felt curious to the four of them to be mounted
and so high above the ragged lines of kneeling
figures on both shoulders of the roadway, heads
in the dust, rumps in the air. The three men
tried not to notice the nakedness, embarrassed that
she was there, equally embarrassed.
  The ranks of samurai banner men approached
relentlessly. There were two columns, each of about
a hundred men, then more flags and massed ranks
surrounding a black lacquered palanquin carried
by eight sweating porters. More banners and
samurai followed, then more leading pack ponies
and last a motley crowd of ladened baggage
porters. All samurai wore grey kimonos
with the same insignia, three interlocking
peonies, that was also on the banners, and straw
hats tied under their chins. Two swords in their
belts, one short, one long. Some had bows and
arrows slung, a few carried muzzle-loading
muskets. A few were more elaborately dressed
than others.
  The columns bore down.
  With growing shock Struan and the others saw what
was on all the faces, all eyes fixed on them:
fury. He was the first to break the spell. "I
think we'd better move farther back ..."
  But before he or any one of them could start, a
young, broad-shouldered samurai broke ranks and
charged up to them, closely followed by another
man, planting himself between them and the approaching
palanquin. Choking with rage, the first man threw
down his banner and shouted, cursing them away, the
suddenness of his blazing anger paralyzing them. The
columns faltered, then picked up the cadence and
continued passing. The kneeling people did not
move. But now, over all was a great, sick
silence, broken only by the sound of marching feet.
  Again the samurai cursed them. Canterbury was
nearest to him. Obediently, nauseated with fear,
he spurred his pony. But the turn was
inadvertently towards the palanquin, not in the other
direction. At once the samurai jerked out his
killing sword, shouted "sonno-joi!" and
hacked with all his might. In the same instant the
other man went for Struan.
  The blow took off Canterbury's left arm
just above his biceps and sliced into his side. The
trader gaped at the stump with disbelief as blood
sprayed onto the girl. The sword whirled in
another brutal arc. Impotently Struan was
groping for his revolver, the other samurai charging
him, blade raised. More by luck than judgment
he twisted out of the path of a blow that wounded him
slightly on his left leg and sliced into his
pony's shoulder. The pony screamed and reared in
sudden panic, knocking the man aside. Struan
aimed and pulled the trigger of the small Colt but
the pony reared again and the bullet went into the air
harmlessly. Frantically he tried to steady the
animal and aimed again, not seeing that now the first man
was attacking from his blind side.
  "Watchouttt!" Tyrer screeched, coming back
to life. Everything had happened so fast it was almost
as though he was imagining the horror--Canterbury
on the ground in agony, his pony fleeing, the
girl stupefied in her saddle, Struan pointing
the gun a second time and the killing sword arching
at his unprotected back. He saw Struan
react to his warning, the frantic pony
skittering at his touch, and the blow that would have killed
him was deflected somehow by the bridle or pommel
and sliced into his side. Struan lurched in his
saddle and let out a howl of pain.
  This galvanized Tyrer.
  He jammed in his spurs and charged Struan's
attacker. The man leapt aside untouched,
noticed the girl and ran for her, sword on
high. Tyrer spun his terrified pony, saw
Angelique staring at the approaching samurai in
frozen horror. "Get out of here, get help!"
he screamed, then again slammed at the man who
once more twisted to safety, recovered
perfectly, and stood with his sword in attack
position.
  Time slowed. Phillip Tyrer knew
he was dead. But that did not seem to matter now for
in the moment's respite he saw Angelique
whirl her pony and flee safely. He had
forgotten his derringer. There was no room to escape,
or time.
  For a split second the youthful samurai
hesitated, exulting in the killing moment, then
leapt. Helplessly, Tyrer tried to back
away. Then the explosion happened, the bullet
thrust the man sprawling and the sword failed,
cutting Tyrer in the arm but not badly.
  For a moment Tyrer did not believe that he was still
alive then he saw Struan reeling in his
saddle, blood seeping from the wound in his side, the
gun levelled at the other samurai, his frenzied
pony twisting and cavorting.
  Again Struan pulled the trigger. The gun was
near the pony's ear. The explosion blew away
her control and she took the bit and charged off,
Struan barely able to hold on. At once the
samurai rushed after him and this moment gave Tyrer
the chance to dig in his spurs, spin away from the
road and race in pursuit, northwards.
  "Sonno-joiiii!" the samurai shouted after
them, enraged that they had escaped.
  John Canterbury was writhing and moaning in the
dirt near some petrified travellers, all of
them still kneeling, heads down and frozen.
Angrily the youth kicked Canterbury's top
hat aside and decapitated him with a single blow.
Then, with great care, he cleansed his blade on the
frock coat, and replaced it in its scabbard.
  And all the while the cortege continued to pass
as though nothing was happening, that nothing had happened,
eyes seeing everything but nothing. Nor did any
of the foot travellers move their heads from the
earth.
  The other younger samurai was sitting
cross-legged on the ground, nursing his shoulder,
using his bunched kimono to stop the flow of blood,
his sword, still stained, in his lap. His compatriot
went over to him and helped him up, cleansed the
sword on the kimono of the nearest traveller,
an old woman, who shivered in terror but kept
her head pressed to the earth.
  Both men were young and strongly built. They
smiled at each other, then, together, examined the
wound. The bullet had gone right through the muscle of
his upper arm. No bone touched. Shorin, the older
said, "The wound's clean, Ori."
  "We should have killed them all."
  "Karma."
  At this moment the massed samurai and the eight
terrified porters carrying the palanquin began
passing, all pretending the two men and the corpse
did not exist. With great deference, the two youths
bowed.
  The tiny side window of the palanquin slid
open, then closed again.

                  

  "Here, Mr. Struan, drink this," the doctor
said kindly, towering over the camp bed. They were in
the surgery of the British Legation at
Kanagawa and he had managed to stanch most of the
blood flow. Tyrer sat on a chair near the
window. The two of them had arrived half an hour
ago. "It will make you feel better."
  "What is it?"
  "Magic--mostly laudanum, that's a
tincture of opium and morphine of my own
devising. It will stop the pain. I have to patch you
up a little but not to worry, I will use ether to put
you quite to sleep."
  Struan felt a sick fear rush through him.
Ether for surgery was a recent innovation, much
heralded, but still experimental. "I've, I've
never had one or an, an operation and, and I
don't ... think ..."
  "Don't worry yourself. Anesthetics are
really quite safe in the right hands." Dr. George
Babcott was twenty-eight, well over six
feet five and equally proportioned. "I've
used ether and chloroform many times over the last
five or six years, with excellent results.
Believe me, you won't feel anything, and it's
a godsend to the patient."
  "That's right, Mr. Struan," Tyrer said,
trying to be helpful, knowing he was not. His arm already
had been swabbed with iodine, sewn up and bandaged
and in a sling and he was thanking his luck that his wound
was relatively superficial. "I met a
fellow at university who told me he had had
his appendix out with chloroform, and it didn't hurt
a bit." He wanted to sound reassuring, but the
idea of any operation--and the gangrene that all too
often followed--frightened him too.
  "Don't forget, Mr. Struan," Babcott
was saying, masking his concern, "it's almost
fifteen years since Dr. Simpson first used
chloroform in surgery and we've learned a lot
since then. I studied under him at the Royal
Infirmary for a year before I went out to the
Crimea." His face saddened. "Learned a lot
there too. Well, that war's over so not to worry,
lovely laudanum will give you some erotic
dreams too, if you're lucky."
  "And if I'm not?"
  "You're lucky. You're both very lucky."
  Struan forced a smile through his pain. "We're
lucky we found you here and so quickly, that's
certain." Instinctively trusting Babcott he
drank the colorless liquid, and lay back again,
almost fainting from the pain.
  "We'll let Mr. Struan rest a moment,"
Babcott said. "You'd better come with me, Mr.
Tyrer, we've things to do."
  "Of course, Doctor. Struan, can I get
you anything, do anything?"
  "No ... no, thanks. No, no need for you
to wait."
  "Don't be silly, of course I'll
wait." Nervously Tyrer followed the doctor
out and closed the door. "Is he going to be all
right?"
  "I don't know. Fortunately samurai
blades are always clean and they cut as
beautifully as any scalpel. Excuse me a
minute, I'm the only official here this afternoon so
now that I've done everything medically possible,
I'd better act like Her Britannic
Majesty's representative." Babcott was
Deputy to Sir William. He ordered the
Legation cutter across the bay to Yokohama to sound
the alarm, sent a Chinese servant to fetch the
local Governor, another to find out what
daimyo, or prince, had passed through
Kanagawa a couple of hours ago, put the
six-man detachment of soldiers on alert, and
poured Tyrer a large whisky. "Drink it, it's
medicinal. You say the assassins shouted something
at you?"
  "Yes, it, it sounded like "sonoh ...
sonnoh-ee.""
  "Means nothing to me. Make yourself at home,
I'll be back in a moment, I've got to get
ready." He went out.
  Tyrer's arm was aching, with seven stitches in it.
Though Babcott had been expert,
Tyrer had been hard put not to cry out. But he
had not and that pleased him. What appalled him were the
currents of fear that continued to shake him, making
him want to run away and keep on running.
"You're a coward," he muttered, aghast at the
discovery.
  Like the surgery, the anteroom stank of
chemicals making his stomach heave. He went to the
window and breathed deeply, trying unsuccessfully
to clear his head, then sipped some of the whisky. As
always the taste was raw and unpleasant. He stared
into the glass. Bad pictures there, very bad. A
shudder went through him. He forced himself to look just at
the liquor. It was golden brown and the smell
reminded him of his home in London, his father after
dinner sitting in front of the fire with his dram,
mother complacently knitting, their two servants
clearing the table, everything warm and cozy and safe,
and that reminded him of Garroway's, his favorite
Coffee House on Cornhill, warm and bustling
and safe, and of university exciting and friendly but
safe. Safe. His whole life safe but now?
Again panic began to overwhelm him. Jesus
Christ, what am I doing here?

  After their escape but still not far enough away from the
Tokaido, Struan's bolting pony had shied
as her half-severed shoulder muscle gave out and
Struan tumbled to the ground. The fall hurt him
badly.
  With great difficulty, still weak with fear, Tyrer
had helped Struan onto his own pony but he had
been barely able to hold the taller heavier man in
the saddle. All the time his attention was on the
disappearing cortege, expecting any moment to see
mounted samurai. "Can you hold on?"'
  "Yes, yes I think so." Struan's
voice was very weak, his pain great.
"Angelique, she got away all right?"'
  "Yes, yes she did. The devils killed
Canterbury."
  "I saw that. Are ... are you hurt?"'
  "No, not really. I don't think so. Just a
gash in my arm." Tyrer tore off his coat,
cursed at the sudden pain. The wound was a neat
slice in the fleshy part of his forearm. He cleaned
some of the blood away with a handkerchief, then used it
as a bandage. "No veins or arteries cut--but
why did they attack us? Why? We weren't doing
any harm."
  "I ... I can't turn around. The bastard
got me in the side ... how ... how does it
look?"'
  With great care Tyrer eased the split in the
broadcloth coat apart. The length and depth of the
cut, made worse by the fall, shocked him.
Blood pulsated from the wound, frightening him
further. "It's not good. We should get a
doctor quickly."
  "We'd, we'd better, better circle for
Yokohama."
  "Yes, yes I suppose so." The young
man held on to Struan and tried to think
clearly. People on the Tokaido were pointing at
them. His anxiety increased. Kanagawa was
nearby and he could see several temples. "One
of them must be ours," he muttered, a foul taste
in his mouth. Then he saw that his hands were covered with
blood and his heart again surged with fright, then
surged again with relief when he discovered that most of
it was Struan's. "We'll go on."
  "What ... did you say?"'
  "We'll go on to Kanagawa--it's close
by and the way clear. I can see several temples,
one of them must be ours. There's bound to be a flag
flying." By Japanese custom, Legations were
housed in sections of Buddhist temples. Only
temples or monasteries had extra rooms or
outbuildings of sufficient size and quantity, so
the Bakufu had had some set aside until
individual residences could be constructed.
  "Can you hold on, Mr. Struan? I'll
lead the pony."
  "Yes." Struan looked across at his own
mount as she whinnied miserably, tried to run again
but failed, her leg useless. Blood ran down
her side from the savage wound. She stood there
shivering. "Put her out of her pain and let's go
on."
  Tyrer had never shot a horse before. He
wiped the sweat off his hands. The derringer had twin
barrels and was breech-loaded with two of the new
bronze cartridges that held bullet and charge
and detonator. The pony skittered but could not go
far. He stroked her head for a second, gentling
her, put the derringer to her ear and pulled the
trigger. The immediacy of her death surprised
him. And the noise that the gun made. He put it
back in his pocket.
  Again he wiped his hands, everything still as in
a trance. "We'd best stay away from the road,
Mr. Struan, best stay out here, safer."
  It took them much longer than he had expected
with ditches and streams to cross. Twice Struan
almost lost consciousness, and Tyrer only just
managed to keep him from falling again. Peasants in
the rice paddies pretended not to see them, or
stared at them rudely, then went back to their work,
so Tyrer just cursed them and pressed onwards.
  The first temple was empty but for a few frightened,
shaven-headed Buddhist monks in orange robes
who scurried away into inner rooms the moment they
saw them. There was a small fountain in the
forecourt. Thankfully Tyrer drank some of the
cool water, then refilled the cup and brought it
to Struan who drank but could hardly see for pain.
  "Thanks. How ... how much farther?"'
  "Not far," Tyrer said, not knowing which way to go,
trying to be brave. "We'll be there any
moment."
  Here the path forked, one way going towards the
coast and to another temple soaring above village
houses, the other deeper into the town and another
temple. For no reason he chose the way
towards the coast.
  The path meandered, ran back on itself then went
east again, no people in the maze of alleys but eyes
everywhere. Then he saw the main gate of the temple
and the Union Jack and the scarlet-uniformed
soldier and almost wept with relief and pride for
at once they were seen and the soldier rushed to help,
another went for the Sergeant of the Guard and in no
time there was Dr. Babcott towering over him.
  "Christ Almighty, what the hell's
happened?"'
  It had been easy to tell--there was so little
to tell.

  "Have you ever assisted at an operation before?"
  "No, Doctor."
  Babcott smiled, his face and manner
genial, his hands moving swiftly, undressing the
half-conscious Malcolm Struan as easily as
if he were a child. "Well, soon you will have, good
experience for you. I need help and I'm the only
one here today. You'll be back in Yokohama
by suppertime."
  "I'll ... I'll try."
  "You'll probably be sick--it's the smell
mostly, but not to worry. If you are, do it
in the basin and not over the patient." Again
Babcott glanced at him, gauging him, asking
himself how reliable this young man might be, reading his
bottled terror, then went back to work. "We'll
give him ether next and then, off we go. You said
you were in Peking?"
  "Yes, sir, for four months--I came here
by way of Shanghai and arrived a few days
ago." Tyrer was glad to be able to talk to help
keep his mind off the horrors. "The Foreign
Office thought a short stay in Peking learning
Chinese characters would help us with Japanish."
  "Waste of time. If you want to speak it--by the
way, most of us out here call it Japanese, like
Chinese--if you want to read and write it
properly, Chinese characters won't help, hardly
at all." He shifted the inert man to a more
comfortable position. "How much Japanese do you
know?"
  Tyrer's unhappiness increased.
"Practically none, sir. Just a few words.
We were told there would be Japanish, I mean
Japanese grammars and books in Peking but there
weren't any."
  In spite of his enormous concern over this whole
incident, Babcott stopped for a moment and
laughed. "Grammars are as rare as a dragon's
dingle and there're no Japanese dictionaries that
I know of, except Father Alvito's of 1601
and that's in Portuguese--which I've never even
seen and only heard about--and the one Reverend
Priny's been working on for years." He eased
off Struan's white silk shirt, wet with
blood. "Do you speak Dutch?"
  "Again just a few words. All student
interpreters for Japan are supposed to have a six
months course but the F.o. sent us off on the
first available steamer. Why is Dutch the
official foreign language used by the
Japanese bureaucracy?"
  "It isn't. The F.o. are wrong, and wrong
about a lot of things. But it is the only
European language presently spoken by a
few Bakufu--I'm going to lift him
slightly, you pull off his boots then his
trousers, but do it gently."
  Awkwardly Tyrer obeyed, using his good left
hand.
  Now Struan was quite naked on the surgical
table. Beyond were the surgical instruments and
salves and bottles. Babcott turned away
and put on a heavy, waterproofed apron.
Instantly Tyrer saw only a butcher. His
stomach heaved and he just made the basin in time.
  Babcott sighed. How many hundred times have
I vomited my heart out and then some more? But I
need help so this child has to grow up. "Come here,
we have to work quickly."
  "I can't, I just can't ..."
  At once the doctor roughened his voice. "You
come over here right smartly and help or Struan will
die and before that I'll thump the hell out of you!"
  Tyrer stumbled over to his side.
  "Not here, for God's sake, opposite me!
Hold his hands!"
  Struan opened his eyes briefly at
Tyrer's touch and went back again into his
nightmare, mouthing incoherently.
  "It's me," Tyrer muttered, not knowing what
else to say.
  On the other side of the table Babcott had
uncorked the small, unlabeled bottle and now
he poured some of the yellowish oily liquid onto
a thick linen pad. "Hold him firmly," he
said, and pressed the pad over Struan's nose and
mouth.
  At once Struan felt himself being suffocated
and grabbed at the pad, almost tearing it away with
surprising strength. "For Christ sake, get
hold of him," Babcott snarled. Again Tyrer
grabbed Struan's wrists, forgetting his bad arm,
and cried out but managed to hold on, the ether
fumes revolting him. Still Struan struggled,
twisting his head to escape, feeling himself dragged
down into this never-ending cesspool. Gradually his
strength waned, and vanished.
  "Excellent," Babcott said. "Astonishing
how strong patients are sometimes." He turned
Struan onto his stomach, making his head comfortable,
revealing the true extent of the wound that began in his
back and came around just under the rib cage to end
near his navel. "Keep a close watch on him
and tell me if he stirs--when I tell you
give him more ether ..." But Tyrer was again at the
basin. "Hurry up!"
  Babcott did not wait, letting his hands
flow, used to operating in far worse
circumstances. Crimea with tens of thousands of
soldiers dying--cholera, dysentery, smallpox
mostly--and then all the wounded, the howls in
the night and in the day, and then in the night the Lady
of the Lamp who brought order out of chaos in
military hospitals. Nurse Nightingale
who ordered, cajoled, threatened, demanded, begged
but somehow instituted her new ideas and cleansed that
which was filthy, cast out hopelessness and useless death,
yet still had time to visit the sick and the needy all
hours of the night, her oil or candle lamp held
high, lighting her passage from bed to bed.
  "Don't know how she did it," he muttered.
  "Sir?"
  Momentarily he looked up and saw Tyrer,
white-faced, staring at him. He had quite forgotten
him. "I was just thinking about the Lady of the Lamp,"
he said, allowing his mouth to talk, to calm himself--
without letting this disturb his concentration on the sliced
muscles and damaged veins. "Florence
Nightingale. She went out to the Crimea with just
thirty-eight nurses and in four months cut the
death rate from forty in every hundred to about two--in
every hundred."
  Tyrer knew the statistic as every Englishman
knew proudly that she had really founded the modern
profession of nursing. "What was she
like--personally?"
  "Terrible, if you didn't keep everything clean
and as she wanted it. Otherwise she was Godlike
--in its most Christian way. She was born in
Florence, in Italy, hence her name--though she was
English through and through."
  "Yes." Tyrer felt the doctor's warmth.
"Wonderful. So wonderful. Did you know her
well?"
  Babcott's eyes did not waver from the wound,
or from his wise fingers as they probed and found, as
he had feared, the severed part of the intestine. He
swore without noticing it. Delicately he
began seeking the other end. The stench increased.
"You were talking about Dutch. You know why some of the
Japanners speak Dutch?"
  With a violent effort, Tyrer tore his gaze
away from the fingers and tried to close his nostrils.
He felt his stomach twist. "No sir."
  Struan stirred. At once Babcott said,
"Give him more of the ether ... that's right, don't
press too firmly ... good. Well done.
How do you feel?"
  "Dreadful."
  "Never mind." The fingers began again, almost
outside the doctor's will, then stopped.
Gently they exposed the other part of the severed
intestine. "Wash your hands then give me the
needle that's already threaded--there, on the table."
  Tyrer obeyed.
  "Good. Thanks." Babcott began the
repair. Very accurately. "His liver's not
hurt, bruised a little but not cut. His kidney's
all right too. Ichiban--that's Japanese for
"very good." I have a few Japanner patients.
In return for my work I make them give me
words and phrases. I'll help you learn if you
like."
  "I'd ... that would be wonderful--ichiban.
Sorry I'm so useless."
  "You're not. I hate doing this alone. I,
well I get frightened. Funny, but I do."
For a moment his fingers filled the room.
  Tyrer looked at Struan's face, no
color now where an hour ago it was ruddy, and
strong where now it was stretched and ominous, eyelids
flickering from time to time. Strange, he thought,
strange how unbelievably naked Struan
seems now. Two days ago I'd never even
heard his name, now we're bonded like brothers, now
life is different, will be different for both of us,
like it or not. And I know he's brave and I'm
not.
  "Ah, you asked about Dutch," Babcott said,
scarcely listening to himself, all his attention on the
repairs. "Since about 1640 the only contact
Japanners have had with the outside, apart from China,
has been with Dutchmen. All others were forbidden
to land in Japan, particularly Spaniards and
Portuguese. Japanners don't like
Catholics because they meddled in their politics
back in the 1600's. At one time, so legend
says, Japan almost went Catholic. Do you know
any of this?"
  "No sir."
  "So the Dutch were tolerated because they'd never
brought missionaries here, just wanted to trade."
For a moment he stopped talking but his fingers continued
the fine neat stitches. Then he rambled on again.
"So a few Hollanders, men never women, were
allowed to stay, but only with the most severe
restrictions and confined on a man-made island of
three acres in Nagasaki harbor called
Deshima. The Dutch obeyed any law the
Japanners made, and kowtowed--growing rich
meanwhile. They brought in books, when they
were allowed, traded, when they were allowed, and carried
the China trade that's essential to Japan--
Chinese silks and silver for gold, paper,
lacquer, chopsticks--you know what those are?"
  "Yes sir. I was in Peking for three
months."
  "Oh yes, sorry I forgot. Never mind.
According to Dutch journals of the 1600's the first of the
Toranaga Shoguns, their equivalent of
emperors, decided foreign influence was against
Japan's interests, so he closed the country and
decreed that Japanners could not build any
oceangoing ships, or leave the country--anyone
who did could not come back or if they returned,
they were to be killed instantly. That's still the law."
His fingers stopped for an instant as the delicate
thread parted and he cursed. "Give me the other
needle. Can't get decent gut though this silk's
fine. Try to thread one of the others but wash your
hands first and wash it when you're done. Thanks."
  Tyrer was glad to have something to do and turned away
but his fingers were helpless. His nausea was growing
again, his head throbbing. "You were saying, about the
Dutch?"
  "Ah yes. So, warily, Dutch and
Japanners began learning from the other though the
Dutch were officially forbidden to learn Japanese.
Ten odd years ago the Bakufu started a
Dutch language school ..." Both men heard
the running feet.
  Hasty knock. The sweating Grenadier
Sergeant stood there, trained never to enter while
an operation was in progress. "Sorry
to interrupt, sir, but there's four of the rotten little
buggers coming down the road. Looks like a
deputation. They's all samurai."
  The doctor did not stop sewing. "Is Lim
with them?"
  "Yessir."
  "Escort them into the reception room and tell
Lim to look after them. I'll be there as soon as
I can."
  "Yessir." The Sergeant took one last
glazed look at the table, then fled.
  The doctor completed another stitch, knotted
it, cut the thread, swabbed the oozing wound, and
began anew. "Lim's one of our Chinese
assistants. Our Chinese do most of our leg
work, not that they're Japanese speakers or, or
very trustworthy."
  "We ... it was the same ... we found it was the
same in Peking, sir. Dreadful liars."
  "The Japanners are worse--but in a way
that's not true either. It's not that they're liars,
it's just that truth is mobile and depends on the
whim of the speaker. Very important for you to learn
to speak Japanese very quickly. We don't have
even one interpreter, not of our own people."
  Tyrer gaped at him. "None?"
  "None. The British padre speaks a little but
we can't use him, Japanners detest
missionaries and priests. We've only three
Dutch speakers in the Settlement, one
Hollander, one Swiss who's our interpreter,
and a Cape Colony trader, none British.
In the Settlement we speak a bastard sort of
lingua franca called "pidgin," like in Hong
Kong and Singapore and the other China Treaty
ports and use compradores, business
intercessors."
  "It was the same in Peking."
  Babcott heard the irritation but more the underlying
danger. He glanced up, instantly saw
into Tyrer that he was near to breaking, ready to vomit
again any second. "You're doing fine," he said
encouragingly, then straightened to ease his back,
sweat running off him. Again he bent down. Very
carefully he resettled the repaired intestine
into the cavity, quickly began to stitch another
laceration, working outwards. "How'd you like Peking?"
he asked, not caring but wanting Tyrer to talk.
Better that than an outburst, he thought. Can't
deal with him till this poor bugger's closed up.
"I've never been there. Did you like it?"
  "I, well ... yes, yes, very much." Tyrer
tried to collect his wits through a blinding headache
that racked him. "The Manchus are quite subdued at
the moment, so we could go anywhere we wanted quite
safely." Manchus, a nomadic tribe from
Manchuria, had conquered China in 1644 and now
ruled as the Ch'ing Dynasty. "We could ride
around without ... without any problems ... the
Chinese were ... not too friendly but ..." The
closeness of the room and the smell crested. A
spasm took him and he was sick again and, still
nauseated, came back. "Sorry."
  "You were saying--about Manchus?"
  Suddenly Tyrer wanted to scream that he cared
nothing about Manchus or Peking or anything,
wanting to run from the stench and his helplessness.
"The devil with--"
  "Talk to me! Talk!"
  "We, we were told that ... that normally they're
an arrogant, nasty lot and it's obvious the
Chinese hate Manchus mortally." Tyrer's
voice was phlegmy but the more he concentrated the
less he felt the urge to flee. He continued,
hesitating, "It, it seems they're all
petrified the Tai'ping Rebellion will spread
up from Nanking and engulf Peking, and that will be the
end of ...." He stopped, listening intently. His
mouth had a dreadful taste and his head pounded even
more.
  "What is it?"
  "I ... I thought I heard someone shouting."
  Babcott listened, hearing nothing. "Go on about
Manchus."
  "Well, the, er, the Tai'ping Rebellion.
Rumor has it that more than ten million
peasants have been killed or died of famine in the
last few years. But it's quiet in Peking--of
course burning and looting the Summer Palace
by British and French forces two years ago that
Lord Elgin ordered as a reprisal, also taught
the Manchus a lesson they won't forget in a
hurry. They aren't going to murder any more
British lightly. Isn't that what Sir
William will order here? A reprisal?"
  "If we knew who to carry out the reprisal
against we would have started. But against who? You can't
bombard Yedo because of a few unknown assassins
..."
  Angry voices interrupted him, the
Sergeant's English at odds with guttural
Japanese. Then the door was jerked open by a
samurai and behind him two others threatened the
Sergeant, their swords half out of their
scabbards, two Grenadiers with breech-loaders
levelled stood in the passageway. The fourth
samurai, an older man, came forward into the
room. Tyrer backed against the wall,
petrified, reliving Canterbury's death.
  "Kinjiru!" Babcott bellowed, and
everyone froze. For a moment it looked as though the
older man, furious now, would pull out his sword
and attack. Then Babcott whirled and faced
them, a scalpel in his enormous fist, blood
on his hands and apron, gigantic and
diabolical. "Kinjiru!" he ordered again,
then pointed with the scalpel. "Get out!
Dete. Dete ... dozo." He glared at
all of them then turned his back on them and continued
sewing and swabbing. "Sergeant, show them the
reception room--politely!"
  "Yessir." With signs, the Sergeant
beckoned to the samurai who chattered angrily
amongst themselves. "Dozo," he said, muttering.
"Come on, you rotten little bastards." Again he
beckoned. The older samurai imperiously
waved at the others and stomped off. At once the
other three bowed and followed.
  Awkwardly Babcott wiped a bead of sweat
off his chin with the back of his hand, then continued his work,
his head and neck and back aching. "Kinjiru
means It is forbidden," he said, making his voice
calm though his heart was beating violently as it
always did when samurai were near with drawn or
even half-drawn swords and he had no pistol
or gun in his hands, cocked and ready. Too many
times he had been summoned to the result of their
swords, against both Europeans and themselves--
fights and samurai feuds were constant in and around
Yokohama, Kanagawa and the surrounding
villages. "Dozo means please, Dete go
out. Very important to use please and thank you with
Japanese. Thank you is domo. Use them
even if you shout." He glanced at Tyrer who was
still against the wall, shaking. "There's whisky in the
cabinet."
  "I'm ... I'm all right ..."
  "You're not, you're still in shock. Take a good
dose of whisky. Sip it. Soon as I'm
finished I'll give you something to stop the sickness.
You-are-not-to-worry! Understand?"
  Tyrer nodded. Tears began streaming down his
face that he could not stop and he found it difficult
to walk. "What's ... what's the matter with ...
me?" he gasped.
  "Just shock, don't worry about it. It'll
pass. It's normal in war and we're at war
here. I'll be finished soon. Then we'll deal
with those bastards."
  "How ... how will you do that?"
  "I don't know." An edge came into the
doctor's voice, as he cleaned the wound again with a
fresh square of linen from a dwindling pile--still much
sewing to be done. "The usual I suppose, just
wave my hands and tell them our Minister will give
them bloody hell and try to find out who attacked
you. Of course they'll deny all knowledge of the
affair, which is probably right--they never seem
to know anything about anything. They're unlike any
other people I've ever come across. I don't know
whether they're just plain stupid, or clever and
secretive to the point of genius. We can't
seem to penetrate their society--nor can our
Chinese--we've no allies amongst them, can't
seem to bribe any of them to help us, we can't
even speak to them directly. We're all so
helpless. Are you feeling better?"
  Tyrer had taken a little whisky. Before that he
had wiped the tears away, filled with shame, and
washed his mouth and poured water on his head. "Not
really ... but thanks. I'm all right. How about
Struan?"
  After a pause Babcott said, "I don't
know. You never truly know." His heart surged at
the sound of more footsteps, Tyrer blanched. A
knock. The door opened immediately.
  "Christ Jesus," Jamie McFay
gasped, his whole attention on the bloody table
and the great gash in Struan's side. "Is he
going to be all right?"
  "Hello, Jamie," Babcott said. "You
heard about--"
  "Yes, we've just come from the Tokaido,
tracking Mr. Struan on the off chance,
Dmitri's outside. You all right, Mr.
Tyrer? The bastards butchered poor old
Canterbury into a dozen pieces and left the
bits to the crows ..." Tyrer lurched for the basin
again. Uneasily, McFay stayed at the door.
"For Christ's sake, George, is Mr.
Struan going to be all right?"
  "I don't know!" Babcott flared, his
never-ending impotence at not knowing erupted as
anger, not understanding why some patients lived and
others less wounded did not, why some wounds rotted
and others healed. "He's lost pints of blood,
I've repaired a severed intestine, three
lacerations, there are three veins and two muscles
yet to be done and the wound closed and Christ alone
knows how much foulness has got in from the air
to infect him if that's where disease or gangrene
comes from. I don't know!
I-don't-bloody-know! Now get to hell out of
here and deal with those four Bakufu bastards and find
out who did this by God."
  "Yes, certainly, sorry, George,"
McFay said, beside himself with worry, and
shocked at the violence from Babcott who was
usually imperturbable, adding hastily, "we'll
try--Dmitri's with me--but we know who did it,
we leaned on a Chinese shopkeeper in the
village. It's damn strange, the samurai were
all from Satsuma and--"
  "Where the hell's that?"
  "He said it's a kingdom near Nagasaki on
the south island, six or seven hundred miles
away and--"
  "What the hell are they doing here for God's
sake?"
  "He didn't know, but he swore they were
overnighting at Hodogaya--Phillip, that's a
way station on the Tokaido not ten miles from
here--and their king was with them."

                  

  Sanjiro, Lord of Satsuma, eyes
slitted and pitiless--a heavyset, bearded man
of forty-two, his swords priceless, his blue
over-mantle the finest silk--looked at his most
trusted advisor. "Was the attack a good thing
or a bad thing?"
  "It was good, Sire," Katsumata said
softly, knowing there were spies everywhere. The two men
were alone, kneeling opposite each other, in the
best quarters of an inn at Hodogaya, a
village way station on the Tokaido, barely
two miles inland from the Settlement.
  "Why?" For six centuries Sanjiro's
ancestors had ruled Satsuma, the richest and
most powerful fief in all Japan--except for
those of his hated enemies, the Toranaga clans
--and, as zealously, had guarded its independence.
  "It will create trouble between the Shogunate and
gai-jin," Katsumata said. He was a thin,
steel-hard man, a master swordsman and the most
famous of all Sensei--teachers--of martial
arts in Satsuma province. "The more those dogs
are in conflict the sooner they will clash, the sooner
the clash the better, for that will help bring down the
Toranagas and their puppets at last, and let
you install a new Shogunate, a new
Shogun, new officials, with Satsuma
preeminent and yourself one of a new roju."
Roju was another name for the Council of Five
Elders that ruled in the name of the Shogun.
  One of the roju? Why only one,
Sanjiro thought secretly. Why not Chief
Minister? Why not Shogun--I have all the necessary
lineage. Two and a half centuries of
Toranaga Shoguns is more than enough.
Nobusada, the fourteenth, should be the last--by my
father's head, will be the last!
  This Shogunate had been established by the
warlord Toranaga in 1603 after winning the
battle of Sekigahara, where his legions took
forty thousand enemy heads. With Sekigahara he
eliminated all practical opposition and, for the
first time in history, had subdued Nippon, the
Land of the Gods, as Japanese called their
country, and brought it under one rule.
  At once this brilliant general and
administrator, now holding absolute
temporal power, gratefully accepted the title
Shogun, the highest rank a mortal could have, from
a powerless Emperor--which confirmed him, legally, as
Dictator. Quickly he made his Sh@ogunate
hereditary, at once decreeing that, in future,
all temporal matters were the sole province
of the Sh@ogun, all spiritual matters the
Emperor's.
  For the last eight centuries the Emperor, the
Son of Heaven, and his court had lived in
seclusion in the walled Imperial Palace at
Ky@oto. Once a year, only, he came
outside the walls to visit the sacred Ise
shrine but, even then, he was hidden from all eyes,
his face never seen in public. Even inside the
walls he was screened from all but his most immediate
family by zealous, hereditary officials and
ancient, mystic protocols.
  Thus the warlord who had physical possession
of the Palace Gates decided who went in and who
came out, had de facto possession of the
Emperor and his ear, and thus his influence and power.
And though all Japanese absolutely
believed him to be divine, and accepted him as the
Son of Heaven, and descended from the Sun
Goddess in an unbroken line since time
began, by historic custom the Emperor and his
court retained no armies, and had no revenue
other than that granted by the warlord at his Gates--
yearly at the man's whim.
  For decades Sh@ogun Toranaga, his son
and grandson, ruled with wise though ruthless control.
Following generations loosened their hold, lesser
officials usurped more and more power,
gradually making their own offices hereditary too.
The Sh@ogun remained titular head but, over a
century or more, had become a puppet--but always
and only selected from the Toranaga line, as was
the Council of Elders. The present Sh@ogun,
Nobusada, was chosen four years ago when he was
twelve.
  And not long for this earth, Sanjiro promised
himself, and came back to the present problem which
disturbed him. "Katsumata, the killings, though
merited, may provoke the gai-jin too much and that
would be bad for Satsuma."
  "I do not see any bad, Sire. The
Emperor wants the gai-jin expelled, you do, as
do most daimyos. That the two samurai are
Satsumas will also please the Emperor. Do not
forget your mission to Yedo was accomplished
perfectly."
  Three months ago Sanjiro had persuaded
Emperor Komei, through intermediaries at the
Imperial court in Ky@oto, personally to sign
several "wishes" Sanjiro had suggested, and
to appoint him escort to an Imperial
Messenger who would formally deliver the scroll in
Yedo which would ensure its acceptance--a "wish"
of the Emperor, if accepted, was difficult
to refuse, sometimes. For the last two months he
had led the negotiations and as much as the Elders and
their Bakufu officials twisted and turned, he
had dominated them and now had their written assent
to certain reforms bound to weaken the whole
Sh@ogunate. Importantly he now had their
formal consent to cancel the hated Treaties, signed
against the Emperor's wishes, to expel the hated
gai-jin and to close the land as it was before the
unwelcome arrival and forced entry of Perry.
  "Meanwhile, what about those two fools who
broke ranks and killed without orders?"
Sanjiro asked.
  "Any act that embarrasses the Bakufu
helps you."
  "I agree the gai-jin were provocative.
Those vermin had no right to be anywhere near me.
My banner and the Imperial banner were in the
front rank forbidding it."
  "So let the gai-jin bear the consequences of their
act: they forced their way onto our shores against
our wishes and have the Yokohama foothold. With the
men we have now, and a surprise attack by night,
we could obliterate the Settlement and
burn the surrounding villages easily. We could
do it tonight and solve the problem permanently."
  "Yokohama yes, with a sudden attack. But
we cannot get at their fleets, we cannot squash them
and their cannon."
  "Yes, Sire. And the gai-jin would
retaliate at once. Their fleet would bombard
Yedo and destroy it."
  "I agree, and the sooner the better. But that would
not destroy the Sh@ogunate and after Yedo they would
go against me, they would attack my capital,
Kagoshima. I cannot risk that."
  "I believe Yedo would satisfy them,
Sire. If their base is burnt they would have to go
back aboard their ships and sail away, back
to Hong Kong. Sometime in the future they may come
back, but then they must land in strength to erect a
new base. Worse for them, they must use land
forces to maintain it."
  "They humbled China. Their war machine is
invincible."
  "This isn't China and we are not mealymouthed,
cowardly Chinese to be bled to death or frightened
to death by these carrion. They say they just want
to trade. Good, you want to trade too, for
guns, cannon and ships." Katsumata smiled
and added delicately, "I suggest if we burn
and destroy Yokohama--of course, we pretend
the attack is at the Bakufu's request, the
Sh@ogun's request--when the gai-jin return,
whoever controls the Sh@ogunate then would
reluctantly agree to pay a modest indemnity
and, in return, the gai-jin will happily agree
to tear up their shameful treaties and trade on
any terms we decide to impose."
  "They would attack us at Kagoshima,"
Sanjiro said. "We could not repel them."
  "Our bay is hazardous for shipping not open like
Yedo, we have secret shore batteries,
secret Dutch cannon, we grow stronger every
month. Such an act of war by gai-jin would unite
all daimyo, all samurai, and the whole land
into an irresistible force under your banner.
Gai-jin armies cannot win on land. This is the Land
of the Gods, the gods will come to our aid too,"
Katsumata said fervently, not believing it at
all, manipulating Sanjiro as he had done for
years. "A divine wind, a kamikaze wind,
destroyed the armadas of the Mongol Kublai
Khan six hundred years ago, why not
again?"
  "True," Sanjiro said. "The gods saved
us then. But gai-jin are gai-jin and vile and who
knows what mischief they can invent? Foolish
to invite a sea attack until we've warships
--though yes, the gods are on our side and will
protect us."
  Katsumata laughed to himself. There are no
gods, any gods, or heaven, or life after
death. Stupid to believe otherwise, stupid
gai-jin and their stupid dogma. I believe what
the great Dictator General Nakamura said in
his death poem, From nothing into nothing, Osaka
Castle and all that I have ever done is but a dream
within a dream. "The gai-jin Settlement is within
your grasp like never before. Those two youths awaiting
judgment pointed a way. I beg you take it."
He hesitated and dropped his voice even more.
"Rumor has it, Sire, secretly they are
shishi."
  Sanjiro's eyes narrowed even more.
  Shishi--men of spirit, so called because of their
bravery and deeds--were young revolutionaries who
were spearheading an unheard-of revolt against the
Sh@ogunate. They were a recent phenomenon,
thought to number only about a hundred and fifty
throughout the land.
  To the Sh@ogunate and most daimyos they were
terrorists and madmen to be stamped out.
  To most samurai, particularly rank-and-file
warriors, they were loyalists waging an
all-consuming battle for good, wanting to force the
Toranagas to relinquish the Sh@ogunate and
restore all power to the Emperor, from whom, they
fervently believed, it had been usurped by the
warlord Toranaga, two and a half centuries
ago.
  To many commoners and peasants and merchants, and
particularly to the Floating World of geishas and
Pleasure Houses, shishi were the stuff of
legends, sung about, wept over, and adored.
  All were samurai, young idealists, the
majority coming from the fiefs of Satsuma, Choshu
and Tosa, a few were fanatic xenophobes,
most were ronin--wave men, because they were as free as
the waves--masterless samurai, or samurai who
had been outcast by their lord for disobedience, or a
crime, and had fled their province to escape
punishment, or those who had fled by choice,
believing in a new, outrageous heresy:
that there could be a higher duty than that due their lord,
or their family, a duty to the ruling Emperor
alone.
  A few years ago the growing shishi movement
had formed themselves into small, secret cells,
committing themselves to rediscover bushido--
ancient samurai practices of
self-discipline, duty, honor, death,
swordsmanship and other warlike pursuits,
arts long since lost--except for a few Sensei
who had kept bushido alive. Lost because for the
last two and a half centuries Japan had been
at peace under rigid Toranaga rule that
forbade warlike pursuits, where, for centuries
before, there had been total civil war.
  Cautiously the shishi began to meet and discuss
and to plan. Swordsmanship schools became
centers of discontent. Zealots and radicals
appeared in their midst, some good, some bad. But one
common thread joined them--all were fanatically
anti-Sh@ogunate, and opposed to allowing
Japanese ports to be opened to foreigners and
foreign trade.
  To this end, for the last four years, they had waged
sporadic attacks on gai-jin, and begun
to articulate an unprecedented, all-out revolt
against the legal ruler, Sh@ogun Nobusada, the
all-powerful Council of Elders and Bakufu that
in theory did his bidding, regulating all
aspects of life.
  The shishi had conjured up an all-embracing
slogan, Sonno-joi: Honor the Emperor
and Expel the Barbarians, and had sworn,
whatever the cost, to remove anyone in the way.
  "Even if they are shishi," Sanjiro said
angrily, "I cannot allow such a public
disobedience to go unpunished, however merited--I
agree those gai-jin should have dismounted and knelt, as
customary, and behaved like civilized persons,
yes, it was they who provoked my men. But that
does not excuse those two."
  "I agree, Sire."
  "Then give me your advice," he said
irritably. "If they're shishi as you say and
I crush them, or order them to commit seppuku,
I will be assassinated before the month is out, however
many my guards--don't attempt to deny it, I
know. Disgusting their power is so strong though most
are common goshi."
  "Perhaps that is their strength, Sire,"
Katsumata had replied. Goshi were the lowest
rank of samurai, their families mostly
penniless country samurai, hardly more than the
warrior peasants of olden times with almost no
hope of getting an education, therefore no hope of
advancement, no hope of getting their views acted
upon, or even heard by officials of low rank,
let alone daimyo. "They've nothing to lose but
their lives."
  "If anyone has a grievance I listen, of
course I listen. Special men get special
education, some of them."
  "Why not allow them to lead the attack on the
gai-jin?"
  "And if there is no attack? I cannot hand them
over to the Bakufu, unthinkable, or to the
gai-jin!"
  "Most shishi are just young idealists, without
brains or purpose. A few are troublemakers
and outlaws who are not needed on this earth. However
some could be valuable, if used correctly--a
spy told me the oldest, Shorin, was part of the
team that assassinated Chief Minister Ii."
  "So ka!"
  This had occurred four years ago. Against all
advice, Ii, who was responsible for maneuvering
the boy Nobusada to be Sh@ogun, had also
suggested a highly improper marriage between the
boy and the Emperor's twelve-year-old half
sister, and, worst of all, had negotiated and
signed the hated Treaties. His passing was not
regretted, especially by Sanjiro.
  "Send for them."

  Now in the audience room a maid was serving
Sanjiro tea. Katsumata sat beside him.
Around stood ten of his personal bodyguard.
All were armed. The two youths kneeling below and in
front of him were not, though their swords lay on the
tatami within easy reach. Their nerves were stretched
but they showed none of it. The maid bowed and left,
hiding her fear.
  Sanjiro did not notice her going. He
lifted the exquisite little porcelain cup from the
tray, sipped the tea. The tea's taste was good
to him and he was glad to be ruler and not ruled,
pretending to study the cup, admiring it, his real
attention on the youths. They waited
impassively, knowing the time had come.
  He knew nothing about them except what
Katsumata had told him: that both were goshi,
foot soldiers like their fathers before them. Each had a
stipend of one koku yearly--a measure of dry
rice, about five bushels, considered enough to feed one
family for one year. Both came from villages
near Kagoshima. One was nineteen, the other, who
had been wounded and now had his arm bound, was
seventeen. Both had been to the select samurai
school at Kagoshima he had begun twenty
years ago for those showing special aptitudes that
gave extra training, including studies of
carefully chosen Dutch manuals. Both had
been good students, both were unmarried, both spent
their spare time perfecting their swordsmanship and
learning. Both were eligible for promotion sometime in
the future. The older was called Shorin
Anato, the younger Ori Ryoma.
  The silence became heavier.
  Abruptly he began talking to Katsumata
as though the two youths did not exist: "If any
of my men, however worthy, however much provoked,
whatever the reason, were to commit a violent act that
I had not authorized and they remained within my
reach, I would certainly have to deal with them
severely."
  "Yes, Sire."
  He saw the glint in his counselor's eyes.
"Stupid to be disobedient. If such men wanted
to remain alive their only recourse would be
to flee and become ronin, even if they were to lose
their stipends. A waste of their lives if they
happened to be worthy." Then he looked at the
youths, scrutinizing them carefully. To his
surprise he saw nothing on their faces, just the
same grave impassivity. His caution
increased.
  "You are quite correct, Sire. As always,"
Katsumata added. "It might be that some such men,
if special men of honor, knowing that they had
disturbed your harmony, knowing you would have no other
option than to punish them severely, these special
men even as ronin would still guard your interests, perhaps
even forward your interests."
  "Such men do not exist," Sanjiro said,
secretly delighted his counselor agreed with
him. He turned his pitiless eyes onto the young
men. "Do they?"
  Both youths tried to maintain their direct
gaze but they were overwhelmed. They dropped their
glance. Shorin, the older, muttered,
"There, there are such men, Sire."
  The silence became rougher as Sanjiro waited
for the other youth to declare himself also. Then the younger Ori
nodded his bowed head imperceptibly, put both
hands flat on the tatami and bowed lower. "Yes,
Lord, I agree."
  Sanjiro was content for now, at no cost, he
had their allegiance and two spies within the movement
--whom Katsumata would be answerable for.
  "Such men would be useful, if they existed." His
voice was curt and final. "Katsumata,
write an immediate letter to the Bakufu, informing them
two goshi called ..." he thought a moment,
paying no attention to the rustle in the room, "put
whatever names you like ... broke ranks and killed
some gai-jin today because of their provocative and
insolent attitude, the gai-jin were armed with
pistols which they pointed threateningly at my
palanquin. These two men, provoked as all my
men were, escaped before they could be caught and
bound." He looked back at the youths. "As to you
two, you will both come back at the first night watch
for sentencing."
  Katsumata said quickly, "Sire, may I
suggest you add in the letter that they have been ordered
outcast, declared ronin, their stipends cancelled and a
reward offered for their heads."
  "Two koku. Post it in their villages when
we return." Sanjiro turned his eyes on
Shorin and Ori and waved his hand in dismissal.
They bowed deeply and left. He was pleased
to see the sweat on the back of their kimonos though
the afternoon was not hot.
  "Katsumata, about Yokohama," he said
softly when they were alone again. "Send some of our
best spies to see what is going on there. Order
them to be back here by nightfall, and order all
samurai to become battle ready."
  "Yes, Sire." Katsumata did not allow
a smile to show.

  When the youths left Sanjiro and had passed
through the rings of bodyguards, Katsumata caught
up with them. "Follow me." He led the way through
meandering gardens to a side door that was unguarded.
  "Go at once to Kanagawa, to the Inn of the
Midnight Blossoms. It is a safe house,
other friends will be there. Hurry!"
  "But, Sensei," Ori said. "First we must
collect our other swords and armor and
money and--"
  "Silence!" Angrily Katsumata reached
into his kimono sleeve and gave them a small
purse with a few coins in it. "Take this, and
return double for your insolence. At sunset I
will order men to go after you with orders to kill you if
you're caught within one ri." A ri was about a
league, about three miles.
  "Yes, Sensei, I apologize for being so
rude."
  "Your apology is not accepted. You are both
fools. You should have killed all four barbarians,
not just one--particularly the girl for that would have sent
the gai-jin mad with rage! How many times have I
told you? They're not civilized like us, and view
the world, religion and women differently! You're
inept! You're fools! You initiated a good
attack then failed to press forward ruthlessly
without concern for your own lives. You hesitated!
So you lost! Fools!" he said again. "You forgot
everything I've taught you." Enraged, he
backhanded Shorin in the face, the blow savage.
  At once Shorin bowed, mumbled an abject
apology for causing the Sensei to lose wa,
to lose inner harmony, keeping his head bowed,
desperately trying to contain the pain. Ori stayed
ramrod stiff waiting for the second blow. It
left a livid burn in its wake. Immediately
he, too, apologized abjectly, and kept his
throbbing head bowed, afraid. Once a fellow
student, the best swordsman amongst them, had
answered Katsumata rudely during a
practice fight. Without hesitation,
Katsumata had sheathed his sword, attacked
barehanded, disarmed him, humiliated him, broke
both his arms and expelled him to his village
forever.
  "Please excuse me, Sensei," Shorin
said, meaning it.
  "Go to the Inn of the Midnight Blossoms.
When I send a message, obey whatever I
require of you at once, there will be no second
chance! At once, understand?"
  "Yes, yes, Sensei, please excuse
me," they mumbled together, tucked up their kimonos
and fled, thankful to be out of his reach, more frightened of
him than of Sanjiro. Katsumata had been
their main teacher for years, in both the arts of war
and, in secret, other arts: strategy, past,
present and of the future, why the Bakufu
had failed in their duty, the Toranagas in
theirs, why there must be change and how to bring it about.
Katsumata was one of the few clandestine shishi who
was hatomoto--an honored retainer with instant
access to his lord--a senior samurai with a
personal yearly stipend of a thousand koku.
  "Eeee, to be so rich," Shorin had
whispered to Ori when they had first found out.
  "Money is nothing, nothing. The Sensei
says when you have power you don't need money."
  "I agree, but think of your family, your father
and mine, and grandfather, they could buy some land of their
own and not have to work the fields of others--nor would have
to work like that from time to time to earn extra."
  "You're right," Ori said.
  Then Shorin had laughed. "No need
to worry, we'll never get even a hundred
koku and if we had it we'd just spend our share
on girls and sak`e and become daimyos of the
Floating World. A thousand koku is all the
money in the world!"
  "No, it's not," Ori had said. "Don't
forget what the Sensei told us."
  During one of Katsumata's secret
sessions for his special group of acolytes he
had said: "The revenue of Satsuma amounts
to seven hundred and fifty thousand koku and belongs
to our lord, the daimyo, to apportion as he sees
fit. That's another custom the new administration
will modify. When the great change has happened,
a fief's revenue will be portioned out by a
Council of State, made up of wise men
drawn from any rank of samurai, high or
low, of any age, provided the man has the necessary
wisdom and has proved himself a man of honor.
It will be the same in all fiefs, as the land will be
governed by a Supreme Council of State in
Yedo or Ky@oto, drawn equally from samurai
of honor--under the guidance of the Son of
Heaven."
  "Sensei, you said any? May I ask, will
that include the Toranagas?"' Ori had asked.
  "There will be no exception, if the man is
worthy."
  "Sensei, please, about the Toranagas.
Does anyone know their real wealth, the lands they
really control?"'
  "After Sekigahara Toranaga took lands
from dead enemies worth yearly about five
million koku, about a third of all the
wealth of Nippon, for himself and his family. In
perpetuity."
  In the stunned silence that followed, Ori had
said for all of them: "With that amount of wealth we,
we could have the greatest navy in the world with all the
men-of-war and cannon and guns we could ever need,
we could have the best legions with the best guns, we
could throw out all gai-jin!"
  "We could even carry war to them and extend our
shores," Katsumata had added softly, "and
correct previous shame."
  At once they had known he was referring to the
tair@o, General Nakamura, Toranaga's
immediate predecessor and liege lord, the great
peasant-general who then possessed the Gates and
had therefore, in gratitude, been granted by the
Emperor the highest possible title a lowborn
could aspire to, tair@o, meaning Dictator
--not that of Sh@ogun which he coveted to obsession but
could never have.
  Having subdued all the land, chiefly
by persuading his main enemy Toranaga to swear
allegiance to him and his child heir forever, he had
gathered a huge armada and mounted a vast
campaign against Chosen, or Korea as it was
sometimes called, to enlighten that country and use it as
a stepping stone to the Dragon Throne of China.
But his armies had failed and soon retreated in
ignominy--as in previous eras, centuries before,
two other Japanese attempts had failed,
equally in disaster, the throne of China a perpetual
lodestone.
  "Such shame needs to be eradicated--like the
shame the Sons of Heaven have suffered because of the
Toranagas who usurped Nakamura's power
when the man died, destroyed his wife and son,
levelled their Osaka castle, and have pillaged the
heritage of the Son of Heaven for long enough!
Sonno-joi!"
  "Sonno-joi!" they had echoed.
Fervently.

  In the dusk the youths were tiring, their headlong
flight racking them. But neither wanted to be the first
to admit it so they pressed on until they were at
the threshold of woods. Ahead now were paddy
swamps on either side of the Tokaid@o that led to the
outskirts of Kanagawa just ahead, and to the
roadblock. The shore was to their right.
  "Let's ... let's stop a moment,"
Ori said, his wounded arm throbbing, head hurting,
chest hurting, but not showing it.
  "All right." Shorin was panting as hard and
hurting as much but he laughed. "You're weak, like
an old woman." He picked a dry patch of
earth, sat down gratefully. With great care he
began to look around, trying to regain his breathing.
  The Tokaid@o was almost empty, night
travel being generally forbidden by the Bakufu and
subject to severe cross questioning and punishment if
not justified. Several porters and the last of the
travellers scurried for the Kanagawa barrier,
all others safely bathing or carousing at the
Inns of their choice--of which there was a multitude
within the post towns. Throughout the land, trunk road
barriers closed at nightfall and were not opened
until dawn, and always guarded by local
samurai.
  Across the bay Shorin could see the oil lamps
along the promenade and in some of the houses of the
Settlement, and amongst the ships at anchor. A
good moon, half full, was rising from near the
horizon.
  "How is your arm, Ori?"
  "Fine, Shorin. We are more than a ri from
Hodogaya."
  "Yes, but I won't feel safe until
we're at the Inn." Shorin began massaging his
neck to try to ease the pain there and in his head.
Katsumata's blow had stunned him. "When we
were before Lord Sanjiro I thought we were finished,
I thought he was going to condemn us."
  "So did I." As he spoke Ori felt
sick, his arm throbbing like his heaving chest, his face
still afire. With his good hand he waved absently at
a swarm of night insects. "If he ... I was
ready to go for my sword and send him on before us."
  "So was I but the Sensei was watching very
closely and he would have killed both of us before we
moved."
  "Yes, you're right again." The younger man
shuddered. "His blow almost took my head off.
Eeee, to have such strength, unbelievable! I'm
glad he's on our side, not against us. He
saved us, only him, he bent Lord Sanjiro
to his will." Ori was suddenly somber. "Shorin,
while I was waiting I ... to keep myself strong,
I composed my death poem."
  Shorin became equally grave. "May I
hear it?"
  "Yes.

"Sonno-joi at sunset,
Nothing wasted.
Into nothing
I spring."

  Shorin thought about the poem, savoring it, the
balance of the words and the third level of meaning. Then
he said solemnly, "It is wise for a samurai
to have composed a death poem. I haven't managed
that yet but I should, then all the rest of life is
extra." He twisted his head from side to side
to the limit, the joints or ligaments cracking, and
he felt better. "You know, Ori, the Sensei
was right, we did hesitate, therefore we lost."
  "I hesitated, he's right in that, I could have
killed the girl easily but she paralyzed me for a
moment. I've never ... her outlandish clothes,
her face like a strange flower with that huge nose
more like a monstrous orchid with two great blue
spots and crowned with yellow stamens--those
unbelievable eyes, Siamese cat eyes and
thatch of straw under that ridiculous hat, so
repulsive yet so, so attracting." Ori
laughed nervously. "I was bewitched. She is
surely a kami from the dark regions."
  "Rip her clothes off and she'd be real enough,
but how attractive I ... I don't know."
  "I thought of that too, wondering what it would be
like." Ori looked up at the moon for a moment.
"If I pillowed with her I think ... I think
I'd become the male spider to her female."
  "You mean she'd kill you afterwards?"
  "Yes, if I pillowed her, with or without
force, that woman would kill me." Ori waved the
air, the insects becoming a pestilence. "I've
never seen one like her--nor have you. You noticed
too, neh?"
  "No, everything happened so fast and I was trying
to kill the big ugly one with the pistol and then she
had fled."
  Ori stared at the faint lights of
Yokohama. "I wonder what she's called,
what she did when she got back there. I've
never seen--she was so ugly and yet ..."
  Shorin was unsettled. Normally Ori hardly
noticed women, just used them when he had a need,
let them entertain him, serve him. Apart from his
adored sister, he could not remember
Ori ever discussing one before. "Karma."
  "Yes, karma." Ori shifted his bandage more
comfortably, the throbbing deepened. Blood seeped
from under it. "Even so, I do not know if we lost.
We must wait, we must be patient and see what
will happen. We always planned to go against gai-jin
at the first opportunity--I was right to go against them
at that moment."
  Shorin got up. "I'm tired of seriousness,
and kami and death. We'll know death soon enough.
The Sensei gave us life for sonno-joi. From
nothing into nothing--but tonight we've another night
to enjoy. A bath, sak`e, food, then a real
Lady of the Night, succulent and sweet-smelling
and moist ..." He laughed softly, "A flower,
not an orchid, with a beautiful nose and proper
eyes. Let's--"
  He stopped. Eastwards, from the direction of
Yokohama came the echoing report of a ship's
signal cannon. Then a signal rocket
briefly lit the darkness.
  "Is that usual?"
  "I don't know." Ahead they could just see the
lamps at the first barrier. "Through the paddy is
better, then we can skirt the guards."
  "Yes. Better we cross the road here and go
closer to the shore. They won't expect
intruders that way, we can avoid any patrols,
and the Inn is nearer."
  They ran across the road, keeping well down,
then up onto one of the paths that transversed the
fields recently planted with winter rice.
Suddenly they stopped. From the Tokaid@o came
the clatter of approaching horses and jingling
harness. They ducked down, waited a moment, then
gasped. Ten uniformed dragoons, armed with
carbines, and led by an officer cantered out of the
curve.
  At once the soldiers were spotted by samurai
at the barrier, who called out a warning. Others
rushed from the huts to join them. Soon there were
twenty lined up behind the barrier, an officer at
their head.
  "What shall we do, Ori?" Shorin whispered.
  "Wait."
  As they watched the senior samurai held up
his hand. "Stop!" he called out, then nodded
slightly instead of a bow, correct etiquette
from a superior to an inferior. "Is your night
travel authorized? If so please
give me the papers."
  Ori's fury soared as he saw the open
insolence of the gai-jin officer who halted about ten
paces from the barrier, called out something in his
strange language and imperiously motioned to the
samurai to open it, neither dismounting nor bowing
courteously as custom demanded.
  "How dare you be so rude! Leave!" the
samurai said angrily, not expecting the insult,
waving them away.
  The gai-jin officer barked an order. At
once his men unslung their carbines, levelled
them at the samurai, then on an abrupt
second order, fired a disciplined volley into the
air. At once they reloaded and now aimed
directly at the guards almost before the sound of the
volley had died away, leaving a vast ominous
silence throughout the landscape.
  Shorin and Ori gasped. For all time guns
had been muzzle-loaded with powder and shot. "Those
are breech-loading rifles, with the new
cartridges," Shorin whispered excitedly.
Neither had ever seen these recent inventions, had
only heard of them. The samurai were equally
shocked. "Eeee, did you notice how fast they
reloaded? I heard a soldier can easily
fire ten rounds to one of a muzzle loader."
  "But did you see their discipline, Shorin, and that
of the horses, they hardly moved!"
  Once more the gai-jin officer haughtily
motioned them to open the barrier, no mistaking the
threat that if he was not obeyed quickly, all the
samurai were dead.
  "Let them through," the senior samurai said.
  The Dragoon officer disdainfully spurred
forward, apparently without fear, his grim faced men
following, their guns ready. None of them
acknowledged the guards or returned their polite
bows.
  "This will be reported at once and an apology
demanded!" the samurai said, enraged with their
insulting behavior, trying not to show it.
  Once they had passed through, the barrier was
replaced and Ori whispered furiously, "What
foul manners! But against those guns what could he
do?"
  "He should have charged and killed them before he died.
I could not do what that coward did--I would have charged
and died," Shorin said, knees trembling with
anger.
  "Yes. I think ..." Ori stopped, his own
anger evaporating at his sudden thought. "Come
on," he whispered urgently. "We'll find out
where they're going--perhaps we can steal some of those
guns."

                  

  The Royal Naval longboat came out of the
twilight and sped for the Kanagawa jetty. It was
strongly built of stone and wood, unlike the
others that speckled the shore, and boldly
signposted in English and Japanese script:
"Property of H.m. British Legation,
Kanagawa--trespassers will be
prosecuted." The longboat was rowed briskly
by sailors and crammed with armed marines. A thin
band of scarlet still rimmed the western horizon.
The sea was choppy, the moon rising nicely with a
fair wind jostling the clouds.
  One of the Legation Grenadiers waited at the
end of the wharf. Beside him was a round-faced Chinese
wearing a long, high-necked gown, and carrying an
oil lamp on a pole.
  "Oars ho!" the Bosun ordered. At once
all oars were shipped, the bowman leaped onto the
wharf and tied the boat to a bollard, marines
followed rapidly in disciplined order and formed up
defensively, guns ready, their Sergeant
studying the terrain. In the stern was a naval
officer. And Angelique Richaud. He
helped her ashore.
  "Evening sir, Ma'am," the Grenadier said,
saluting the officer. "This here's Lun, he's a
Legation assistant."
  Lun gawked at the girl. "Ev'nin, sah,
you cumalong plenty quick quick, heya? Missy
cumalong never mind."
  Angelique was nervous and anxious and wore a
bonnet and a blue silk hooped dress with a
shawl to match that set off her paleness and fair
hair to perfection. "Mr. Struan, how is
he?"
  The soldier said kindly, "Don't know,
Ma'am, Miss. Doc Babcott he's the
best in these waters so the poor man will be all right
if it's God's will. He'll be proper pleased
to see you--been asking for you. We didn't
expect you till morning."
  "And Mr. Tyrer?"
  "He's fine, Miss, just a flesh wound. We
best be going."
  "How far is it?"
  Lun said irritably, "Ayeeyah no far
chop chop never mind." He lifted the lamp and
set off into the night, muttering busily in
Cantonese.
  Insolent bastard, the officer thought. He was
tall, Lieutenant R.n., his name John
Marlowe. They began to follow. At once the
marines moved into a protective screen, scouts
ahead. "Are you all right, Miss
Angelique?" he asked.
  "Yes, thank you." She pulled the shawl
closer around her shoulders, picking her way
carefully. "What an awful smell!"
  "'fraid it's the manure they use for
fertilizers, that and low tide." Marlowe was
twenty-eight, sandy-haired and grey-blue-eyed,
normally Captain of H.m.s. Pearl, a
21-gun steam-driven frigate, but now acting
Flag Lieutenant to the ranking naval officer,
Admiral Ketterer. "Would you like a litter?"
  "Thank you, no, I'm fine."
  Lun was ahead slightly, lighting their way through
the narrow, empty village streets. Most of
Kanagawa was silent, though occasionally they could
hear boisterous and drunken laughter of men and
women behind high walls that were pierced from time to time
by small barred doorways. A multitude of
decorative Japanese signs.
  "These are inns, hotels?" she asked.
  "I would imagine so," Marlowe said
delicately.
  Lun chuckled quietly, hearing this exchange.
His English was fluent--learned in a missionary
school in Hong Kong. On instructions he
carefully hid the fact and always used pidgin and
pretended to be stupid so he knew many secrets
that had great value to him, and to his tong
superiors, and to their leader, Illustrious Chen,
Gordon Chen, compradore of Struan's. A
compradore, usually a well born Eurasian,
was the indispensable go-between betwixt European and
Chinese traders, who could speak fluent English
and Chinese dialects, and to whose hands at least ten
percent of all transactions stuck.
  Ah, haughty young Missy who feeds on
unrequited lust, Lun thought with vast amusement,
knowing lots about her, I wonder which of these
smelly Round Eyes will be the first to spread you
wide and enter your equally smelly Jade
Gate? Are you as untouched as you pretend, or
has the grandson of Green-eyed Devil Struan
already enjoyed the Clouds and the Rain? By all gods
great and small, I shall know soon enough because your maid
is my sister's third cousin's daughter. I
already know your short hairs need plucking, are as
fair as your hair and much too abundant
to please a civilized person but I suppose
all right for a barbarian. Ugh!
  Ayeeyah, but life is interesting. I'll
wager this murder attack will cause both foreign
devils and the Filth Eaters of these islands much
trouble. Wonderful! May they all drown in their
own feces!
  Interesting that the grandson of Green-eyed
Devil was wounded badly, and so continues the bad
joss of all males of his line, interesting that the
news is already rushing secretly to Hong Kong
by our fastest courier. How wise I am! But then
I am a person of the Middle Kingdom and of
course superior.
  But a bad wind for one is good for another. This
news will surely depress the share price of the
Noble House mightily. With advanced information I
and my friends will make a great profit. By all the
gods, I will put ten percent of my profit on
the next horse at Happy Valley races
with the number fourteen, today's date by barbarian
counting.
  "Ho!" he called out, pointing. The central
turrets of the temple loomed over the alleys and
lanes of the tiny, single-story houses, all
separate though clustered in honeycombs.
  Two Grenadiers and their Sergeant were on
guard at the temple gates, well lit with oil
lamps, Babcott beside them. "Hello,
Marlowe," he said with a smile. "This is an
unexpected pleasure, evening,
Mademoiselle. What's--"
  "Pardon, Doctor," Angelique
interrupted, peering up at him, astounded at his
size, "but Malcolm, Mr. Struan, we
heard he was badly wounded."
  "He has had quite a bad sword cut, but
he's been sewn up and now he's fast
asleep," Babcott said easily. "I gave
him a sedative. I'll take you to him in a
second. What's up, Marlowe,
why--"
  "And Phillip Tyrer?" she interrupted again.
"Is he, was he badly wounded too?"
  "Just a flesh wound, Mademoiselle, there's
nothing you can do at the moment, both are sedated.
Why the marines, Marlowe?"
  "The Admiral thought you'd better have some
extra protection--in case of an evacuation."
  Babcott whistled. "It's that serious?"
  "There's a meeting going on right now. The
Admiral, the General, Sir William together
with the French, German, Russian and American
representatives and the, er, the trading
fraternity." Marlowe added dryly, "I gather
it's rather heated." He turned to the Royal Marine
Sergeant. "Secure the Legation, Sar'nt
Crimp, I'll inspect your posts later."
To the Grenadier Sergeant he added, "Please
give Sar'nt Crimp the help he needs, where
to billet his men, etc. Your name please?"
  "Towery, sir."
  "Thank you, Sar'nt Towery."
  Babcott said, "Perhaps you'd both follow me?
A cup of tea?"
  "Thank you, no," she said, trying to be
polite but consumed with impatience, disliking the way
the English brewed tea and offered it at the
slightest provocation. "But I would like to see
Mr. Struan and Mr. Tyrer."
  "Of course, right away." The doctor had
already judged that she was near to tears at any
moment, decided she really did need a cup of
tea, perhaps laced with a little brandy, a sedative and
then to bed. "Young Phillip, poor chap had quite a
shock I'm afraid--must have been dreadful for you
too."
  "Is he all right?"
  "Yes, quite all right," he repeated
patiently. "Come along, see for yourself." He
led the way through the courtyard. The clatter of
hooves and harness stopped them. To their surprise
they saw a Dragoon patrol arriving. "Good
God, it's Pallidar," Marlowe said.
"What's he doing here?"
  They watched the Dragoon officer return the
salutes of the marines and grenadiers and dismount.
"Carry on," Pallidar said, not noticing
Marlowe, Babcott and Angelique.
"Bloody bastard Japanners tried to bloody
bar the road against us, by God!
Unfortunately the sons of whores changed their
bloody, God-cursed minds or they'd be pushing
up bloody daisies and ..." He saw
Angelique and stopped, appalled. "Jesus
Christ! Oh, I say, I am ... I am
most terrible sorry, Mademoiselle, I, er,
I didn't realize there were any ladies ...
er, hello John, Doctor."
  Marlowe said, "Hello Settry.
Mademoiselle Angelique, may I
introduce plainspoken Captain Settry
Pallidar, of Her Majesty's Eighth
Dragoons. Mademoiselle Angelique
Richaud."
  She nodded coolly and he bowed stiffly.
"I'm, er, most awfully sorry,
Mademoiselle. Doc, I was sent to secure
the Legation, in case of an evacuation."
  "The Admiral already sent us here to do that,"
Marlowe said crisply. "With marines."
  "You can dismiss them, we're here now."
  "Get ... I suggest you ask for new
orders. Tomorrow. Meanwhile I'm senior officer
and in command. Senior service. Doctor, perhaps
you'd take the lady to see Mr. Struan."
  Babcott had watched the two young men square
up to one another with concern, liking them both.
Friendly on the surface, deadly underneath. These
two young bulls will have at each other one day--
God help them if it's over a woman. "See
you both later." Taking her arm he walked off.
  The two men watched them go. Then Pallidar's
chin jutted. "This isn't a ship's
quarterdeck," he hissed, "it's a job for the
army, by God."
  "Bullshit."
  "Are your brains lost with your manners? Why the
hell bring a woman here when Christ knows what
may happen?"
  "Because the important Mr. Struan asked
to see her, medically it's a good idea, she
persuaded the Admiral to allow her to come tonight against
my advice, he ordered me to escort her here and
send her back safely. Sar'nt Towery!"
  "Yessir!"
  "I'm in overall command until further orders
--show the dragoons to quarters and make them
comfortable. Can you stable their horses? Do you have enough
rations?"
  "Yessir, we've plenty of room.
Grub's a bit short."
  "Has it ever been plentiful in this godforsaken
place?" Marlowe beckoned him closer.
"Spread the word," he said dangerously. "No
fighting and if there is, it's a hundred lashes for
any bastard involved--whoever he is!"

  The bar of the Yokohama Club, the biggest
room in the Settlement and thus the meeting
place, was in uproar and packed with almost the
entire, acceptable population of the Settlement--
only those too drunk to stand or the very sick were
missing--all shouting in various languages, many
armed, many waving their fists and cursing the small
group of well-dressed men who sat at a
raised table at the far end, most of whom were shouting
back, the Admiral and General beside them
apoplectic.
  "Say that again, by God, and I'll call you
outside ..."
  "Go to hell you bastard ..."
  "It's war, Wullem's got to ..."
  "Turn out the bloody army an' navy and
bombard Yedo ..."
  "Flatten the f'ing capital, by God ..."
  "Canterbury's gotta be revenged,
Wullum's got to ..."
  "Right! Willum's responsible, John the
Cant's me mate ..."
  "Listen you lot ..." One of the seated men
began pounding the table top with a gavel for silence.
This only incensed the crowd further--merchants,
tradesmen, innkeepers, gamblers, horse
handlers, butchers, jockeys, seamen, remittance
men, sail makers, and port riffraff. Top
hats, multicolored waistcoats, woolen
clothes and underwear, leather boots, from rich
to poor, the air hot, stale, smoky and heavy
with the odor of unwashed bodies, stale beer,
whisky, gin, rum and spilt wine.
  "Quiet for Christ's sake, let Wullum
speak. ..."
  The man with the gavel shouted, "It's
William, for God's sake! William, not
Wullum or Willum or Willam!
William Aylesbury, how many times do I have
to tell you? William!"
  "That's right, let Willum speak, for
Christ's sake!"
  The three barmen serving drinks behind the
vast counter laughed. "Proper thirsty bloody
work this 'ere meeting, i'nit, guv?" one called
out breezily, wiping the counter with a filthy rag.
The bar was the pride of the Settlement,
deliberately a foot bigger than the one in the
Shanghai Jockey Club, previously the
biggest in Asia, and twice as big as the Hong
Kong Club's. The wall was lined with bottles
of spirits, wine and beer kegs. "Let the bugger
speak, for crissake!"
  Sir William Aylesbury, the man with the
gavel, sighed. He was British Minister in
Japan, senior member of the Diplomatic
Corps. The other men represented France,
Russia, Prussia, and America. His temper
snapped and he motioned to a young officer standing behind the
table. At once, clearly prepared--as were those
at the table--the officer took out a revolver and
fired into the ceiling. Plaster speckled down in the
sudden silence.
  "Thank you. Now," Sir William began,
his voice heavy with sarcasm, "if you gentlemen will
all be quiet for a moment we can proceed." He
was a tall, well-covered man in his late
forties, with a bent face and prominent ears. "I
repeat, as you will all be affected by what we
decide, my colleagues and I wish to discuss
how to respond to this incident--in public. If
you lot don't want to listen, or if you're
asked for an opinion and don't give it with the
minimum of expletives--we will ponder the
matter in private and then, when we've decided
what WILL HAPPEN, we will be glad to inform you."
  A muttering resentment, but no open hostility.
  "Good. Mr. McFay, you were saying?"
  Jamie McFay was near the front,
Dmitri beside him--because he was head of Struan's,
the largest house in Asia, he was the usual
spokesman for the merchant-traders, the most
important of whom had their own fleets of armed
clippers and merchantmen. "Well, sir, we know
the Satsumas are bedding down at Hodogaya in
easy reach north and that their king's with them," he
said, greatly concerned over Malcolm Struan.
"His name's Sajirro, some name like that, and I
think we sh--"
  Someone shouted, "I vote we surround the
bastards tonight and string the bugger up!" A roar of
applause that soon trickled away amidst a
few muffled curses and, "For God's
sake get on with it ..."
  "Please carry on Mr. McFay," Sir
William said wearily.
  "The attack was unprovoked as usual,
John Canterbury foully brutalized, God
only knows how long it will take Mr. Struan
to recover. But this is the first time we can identify
the murderers--or at least the king can and as sure as
God made little apples he has the power to catch
the buggers and hand them over and pay damages.
..." More applause. "They're within reach, andwiththe
troops we have we can peg them."
  Strong cheers and cries for vengeance.
  Henri Bonaparte Seratard, the French
Minister in Japan said loudly, "I would like
to ask Monsieur the General and Monsieur the
Admiral what is their opinion?"
  The Admiral said at once: "I have five
hundred marines in the fleet ..."
  General Thomas Ogilvy interrupted,
firmly but politely, "The question applies to a
land operation, my dear Admiral. Mr.
Ceraturd ..." The greying, red-faced man of
fifty carefully mispronounced the Frenchman's
name and used "Mr." to compound the insult, "we have
a thousand British troops in tent encampments,
two cavalry units, three batteries of the
most modern cannon and artillery, and can call
up another eight or nine thousand British and
Indian infantrymen with support troops within
two months from our Hong Kong bastion." He
toyed with his gold braid. "There is no
conceivable problem that Her Majesty's forces under
my command cannot conclude expeditiously."
  "I agree," the Admiral said under the roars
of approval. When they had died down, Seratard
said smoothly, "Then you advocate a declaration
of war?"
  "No such thing, sir," the General said, their
dislike mutual, "I merely said we can do what
is necessary, when necessary and when we are obliged to do it.
I would have thought this "incident" is a matter for
Her Majesty's Minister to decide in conjunction
with the Admiral and myself without an unseemly
debate."
  Some shouted approval, most disapproved and
someone called out, "It's our silver and taxes
wot pays for all you buggers, we've the right
to say wot's wot. Ever heard of Parliament
by God?"
  "A French national was involved," Seratard
said heatedly above the noise, "therefore the honor of
France is involved." Catcalls and sly
remarks about the girl.
  Again Sir William used the gavel and that
allowed the acting American Minister, Isiah
Adamson, to say coldly, "The idea of going
to war over this incident is nonsense, and the notion of
grabbing or attacking a king in their sovereign
country total lunacy--and typical highhanded
Imperialist jingoism! First thing to do is inform the
Bakufu, then ask them to--"
  Irritably, Sir William said, "Dr.
Babcott has already informed them in Kanagawa,
they've already denied any knowledge of the incident and in all
probability will follow their pattern and continue
to do so. A British subject has been
brutally murdered, another seriously wounded,
unforgivably our delightful young foreign guest was
almost frightened to death--these acts, I must stress as
Mr. McFay so rightly points out, for the first
time have been committed by identifiable criminals.
Her Majesty's Government will not let this go
unpunished. ..." For a moment he was drowned
by tumultuous cheers, then he added, "The only
thing to decide is the measure of punishment, how
we should proceed and when. Mr. Adamson?" he
asked the American.
  "As we're not involved I've no formal
recommendation."
  "Count Zergeyev?"
  "My formal advice," the Russian said
carefully, "is that we fall on Hodogaya and
tear it and all the Satsumas to pieces." He
was in his early thirties, strong, patrician and
bearded, leader of Tsar Alexander II'S
mission. "Force, massive, ferocious and immediate
is the only diplomacy Japanners will ever
understand. My warship would be honored to lead the
attack."
  There was a curious silence. I guessed that would
be your answer, Sir William thought. I'm not
so sure you're wrong. Ah Russia, beautiful
extraordinary Russia, what a shame we're
enemies. Best time I ever had was in St.
Petersburg. Even so you're not going to expand
into these waters, we stopped your invasion of the
Japanese Tsushima islands last year, and this
year we'll prevent you from stealing their Sakhalin
too. "Thank you, my dear Count.
Herr von Heimrich?"
  The Prussian was elderly and curt. "I have
no advice in this, Herr Consul General, other
than to say formally my government would consider it is
a matter for your government alone, and not the affair
of minor parties."
  Seratard flushed. "I do not consider--"
  "Thank you for your advice gentlemen," Sir
William said firmly, cutting off the row that would
have flared between them. Yesterday's Foreign Office
dispatches from London said that Britain could soon
become embroiled in another of the never-ending
European wars, this time belligerent,
pride-filled France against belligerent,
pride-filled expansionist Prussia, but did
not forecast on which side. Why the devil damned
foreigners can't behave as civilized fellows
I'm damned if I know.
  "Before making a judgment," he said crisply,
"since everyone of note is here and not having had
such an opportunity before, I think we should
articulate our problem: We have legal
treaties with Japan. We're here to trade, not
to conquer territory. We have to deal with this
bureaucracy, the Bakufu, who're like a sponge
--one moment it pretends to be all-powerful, the
next helpless against their individual kings.
We've never been able to get to the real power, the
Tycoon or Sh@ogun--we don't even know if
he really exists."
  "He must exist," von Heimrich said
coolly, "because our famous German traveller and
physician, Dr. Engelbert Kaempfer, who
lived in Deshima from 1690 to 1693, pretending
to be a Dutchman, reported visiting him in
Yedo on their annual pilgrimage."
  "That doesn't prove one exists now,"
Seratard said caustically. "However, I do
agree there is a Sh@ogun, and France
approves of a direct approach."
  "An admirable idea, Monsieur." Sir
William reddened. "And how do we do that?"
  "Send the fleet against Yedo," the Russian
said at once, "demand an immediate audience or
else you'll destroy the place. If I had such
a beautiful fleet as yours, I'd first flatten
half the city and then demand the audience ...
better, I would order this Tycoon-Sh@ogun
native to report aboard my flagship at
dawn the next day, and hang him." Many
shouts of approval.
  Sir William said, "That is certainly one
way but Her Majesty's Government would prefer
a slightly more diplomatic solution. Next:
we've almost no real intelligence about what's
going on in the country. I'd appreciate it if
all traders would help to get us information that could
prove useful. Mr. McFay, of all the
traders, you should be the best informed, can you help?"
  McFay said cautiously, "Well, a few
days ago one of our Jappo silk suppliers
told our Chinese compradore that some of the kingdoms
--he used the word "fiefs" and called the kings
"daimyos"--were in revolt against the
Bakufu, particularly Satsuma, and some parts
called Tosa, and Choshu ..."
  Sir William noticed the immediate interest of the
other diplomats and wondered if he was wise to have
asked the question in public. "Where are they?"
  "Satsuma's near Nagasaki in the South
Island, Ky@ush@u," Adamson said, "but what
about Choshu and Tosa?"
  "Well now, yor Honor," an American
seaman called out, his Irish accent pleasing.
"Tosa's a part of Shikoku, that's the big
island on the inland sea. Choshu's far to the west
on the main island, Mr. Adamson, sir,
athwart the Straits. We been through the Straits
there, many a time, they're not more than a mile across
at the narrowest part. As I was saying now,
Choshu's the kingdom's athwart the narrows, bare a
mile across. It's the best, and closest way from
Hong Kong or Shanghai to here.
Shi-mono-seki Straits, the locals call
it, and once we traded for fish and water at the
town there but we weren't welcome." Many others
called out their agreement and that they too had used the
Straits but had never known that the kingdom was called
Choshu.
  Sir William said, "Your name if you
please?"
  "Paddy O'Flaherty, Bosun of the
American whaler, Albatross out of
Seattle, yor Honor."
  "Thank you," Sir William said, and made
a mental note to send for O'Flaherty, to find
out more and if there were charts of the area, and if not
to instantly order the Navy to make them. "Go on
Mr. McFay," he said. "In revolt, you
say."
  "Yes, sir. This silk trader--how reliable
he is I don't know--but he said there was some kind
of power struggle going on against the Tycoon that he
always called "Sh@ogun," the Bakufu and some
king or daimyo called Toranaga."
  Sir William saw the Russian's eyes
slit even more in his almost Asian features.
"Yes, my dear Count?"
  "Nothing, Sir William. But isn't that the
name of the ruler mentioned by Kaempfer?"
  "Indeed it is, indeed it is." I wonder why
you never mentioned to me before that you also had read those very
rare but illuminating journals that were written in
German, which you do not know, therefore must have been
translated into Russian? "Perhaps
"Toranaga" means ruler in their language.
Please continue, Mr. McFay."
  "That's all the fellow told my compradore,
but I'll make it my business to find out more.
Now," McFay said politely but firmly, "do
we settle King Satsuma at Hodogaya tonight
or not?"
  The smoke stirred the silence.
  "Has anyone anything to add--about this
revolt?"
  Norbert Greyforth, chief of Brock and
Sons, Struan's main rival said, "We've
heard rumors of this revolt, too. But I thought
it was something to do with their chief priest, this
"Mikado," who supposedly lives in
Ky@oto, a city near Osaka. I'll make
enquiries as well. In the meantime, about tonight, my
vote goes with McFay, the sooner we belt
these buggers the sooner we'll have peace." He was
taller than McFay and clearly hated him.
  When the cheers died down, like a judge
delivering a sentence, Sir William said: "This
is what will happen. First, there will be no attack
tonight and--"
  Cries of "Resign, we'll do it ourselves
by God, come on, let's go after the bastards ..."
  "We can't, not without troops ..."
  "Quiet and listen, by God!" Sir
William shouted. "If anyone is stupid enough
to go against Hodogaya tonight he'll have to answer to our
laws as well as Japanners. IT IS
FORBIDDEN! Tomorrow I will formally demand--DEMAND--THAT
at once the Bakufu, AND Sh@ogun, tender a
formal apology, at once, hand over the two
murderers for trial and hanging, and at
once pay an indemnity of one hundred thousand
pounds or accept the consequences."
  A few cheered, most did not and the meeting
broke up with a surge to the bar, many of the men already
near blows as arguments became more drunken and more
heated. McFay and Dmitri shoved their way out
into the open air. "My God, that's better."
McFay eased off his hat and mopped his brow.
  "A word, Mr. McFay?"
  He turned and saw Greyforth. "Of course."
  "In private if you please."
  McFay frowned, then moved over the
semi-deserted promenade along the wharfs and
seafront, away from Dmitri who was not in
Struan's but traded through Cooper-Tillman,
one of the American companies. "Yes?"
  Norbert Greyforth dropped his voice.
"What about Hodogaya? You've two ships here,
we've three, and between us lots of bully boys,
most lads in the merchant fleet'd join us,
we've arms enough and we could bring a cannon or
two. John Canterbury was a good friend, the
Old Man liked him, and I want him
revenged. What about it?"
  "If Hodogaya was a port I wouldn't
hesitate, but we can't raid inland. This isn't
China."
  "You afraid of that pipsqueak in there?"
  "I'm not afraid of anyone," McFay said
carefully. "We can't mount a successful raid
without regular troops, Norbert, that's not
possible. I want revenge more than any."
  Greyforth made sure no one was listening.
"Since you brought it up tonight and we don't talk
too often, we've heard there's going to be bad
trouble here soon."
  "The revolt?"
  "Yes. Very bad trouble for us. There's been
all sorts of signs. Our silk dealers have
been acting right smelly the last month or two,
upping the price of bulk raw, delaying
deliveries, slow on payments and wanting extra
credits. I'll bet it's the same with you."
  "Yes." It was rare for the two men to talk
business.
  "Don't know much more than that, except many of the
signs are the same as in America that led
to civil war. If that happens here it's going
to bugger us proper. Without the fleet and troops
we're bitched and we can be wiped out."
  After a pause, McFay said, "What do you
propose?"
  "We'll have to wait and see what happens. With
Wee Willie's plan I don't hope for
much, like you. The Russian was right about what should be
done. Meanwhile ..." Greyforth nodded out to sea
where two of their clippers and merchantmen lay in the
roads--clippers still much faster back to England
than steamers, paddle-driven or screw-driven
... "we're keeping all our inner ledgers and
specie aboard, we've increased our levels of
gunpowder, shot, shrapnel and put in an order
for two of the brand-new Yankee, 10-barrel
Gatling machine guns as soon as they are
available."
  McFay laughed. "The hell you have--so did
we!"
  "We heard that too, which is why I made the
order, and twice as many of the new rifles than
your shipment."
  "Who told you, eh? Who's your spy?"
  "Old Mother Hubbard," Greyforth said dryly.
"Listen, we all know these inventions, along with
metal cartridges, have changed the course of war
--that's proved already by the casualties at the
battles of Bull Run and Fredericksburg."
  "Shocking, yes. Dmitri told me, said the
South lost four thousand in one afternoon. Terrible.
So?"
  "We could both sell these weapons to the
Japanners by the ton, my thought is we agree
to not, and together we make bloody sure no other
bugger imports them or smuggles them in.
Selling Jappers steamers and the odd cannon's
one thing, but not repeaters or machine guns.
Agreed?"
  McFay was surprised by the offer. And
suspicious. But he kept it off his face,
sure that Norbert would never keep the bargain, and
shook the offered hand. "Agreed."
  "Good. What's the latest on young Struan?"
  "When I saw him an hour or so ago he was
poorly."
  "Is he going to die?"
  "No, the doctor assured me of that."
  A cold smile. "What the hell do they know?
But if he did that could wreck the Noble House."
  "Nothing will ever wreck the Noble House,
Dirk Struan saw to that."
  "Don't be too sure. Dirk's
been dead more than twenty years, his son
Culum's not far from his deathbed and if Malcolm
dies who's to take over? Not his young brother
who's only ten." His eyes glinted strangely.
"Old Man Brock may be seventy-three but
he's as tough and clever as he ever was."
  "But we're still the Noble House, Culum is
still the tai-pan." McFay added, glad for the
barb, "Old Man Brock's still not a Steward
of the Jockey Club at Happy Valley and
never will be."
  "That'll come soon enough, Jamie, that and all
the rest. Culum Struan won't control the
Jockey Club vote much longer, and if his son
and heir kicks the bucket too, well then,
counting us and our friends we've the necessary votes."
  "It won't happen."
  Greyforth hardened. "Mayhaps Old Man
Brock will honor us with a visit here soon--
along with Sir Morgan."
  "Morgan's in Hong Kong?" McFay
tried to stop his astonishment from showing. Sir
Morgan Brock was Old Man Brock's
eldest son who, very successfully, ran their
London office. As far as Jamie knew
Morgan had never been to Asia before. If
Morgan's suddenly in Hong Kong ... what
new devilment are those two up to now? he asked
himself uneasily. Morgan specialized in
merchant banking and had skillfully spread the
tentacles of Brock's into Europe,
Russia, and North America, always harrying the
Struan trade routes and customers. Since the
American war began last year, McFay,
along with other Directors of Struan's, had
been getting worrying reports about failures
amongst their extensive American interests, both
North and South, where Culum Struan had
invested heavily. "If Old Man Brock and
son grace us with their presence, I've no doubt
we would be honored to give them supper."
  Greyforth laughed without humor. "I doubt
they'll have time, except to inspect your books,
when we take you over."
  "You never will. If I have any news on the
revolt I'll send word, please do likewise.
Good night now." Overpolitely McFay
raised his hat and walked away.
  Greyforth laughed to himself, delighted with the seeds
he had planted. The Old Man will be
happy to harvest them, he thought, tearing them out by the
roots.

  Dr. Babcott trudged wearily along a
corridor in the semi-darkness of the Kanagawa
Legation. He carried a small oil lamp and
wore a dressing gown over woolen pajamas.
From somewhere downstairs a clock chimed two o'clock.
Absently he reached into his pocket and checked
his fob watch, yawned, then knocked on a
door. "Miss Angelique?"
  After a moment she called out sleepily,
"Yes?"
  "You wanted to know when Mr. Struan woke
up."
  "Ah, thank you." A moment, then the door was
unbarred and Angelique came out. Hair a little
dishevelled and still drowsy, wearing a robe over
her nightdress. "How is he?"
  "A little sick, and woozy," Babcott said,
leading her back along the corridor and
downstairs to the surgery where the sickrooms were.
"His temperature and pulse rate are up a
little, of course that's to be expected. I've
given him a drug for the pain, but he's a fine,
strong young man and everything should be all right."
  The first time she had seen Malcolm she had
been shocked by his lack of color, and appalled
by the stench. She had never been in a hospital or
surgery before, or in a real sickroom. Apart from
reading in the Paris newspapers and journals about
death and dying and illness and the waves of plague and
killing diseases--measles, smallpox, typhus,
cholera, pneumonia, meningitis, whooping cough,
scarlet fever, childbed fever and the like--that swept
Paris and Lyon and other cities and towns from time
to time, she had had no close acquaintance with
sickness. Her health had always been good, her
aunt and uncle and brother equally blessed.
  Shakily she had touched his forehead, moving the
sweat-stained hair out of his face, but, repelled
by the smell that surrounded the bed, hurried out.
  In a room nearby Tyrer was sleeping
comfortably. To her great relief there was no smell
here. She thought he had a pleasant sleeping
face where Malcolm Struan had been tormented.
  "Phillip saved my life, Doctor,"
she had said. "After Mr., Mr. Canterbury
I was, me I was paralyzed and Phillip he
flung his horse in the assassin's path
and gave me time to escape. I was, I can't
describe how awful ...."
  "What was the man like? Could you recognize
him?"'
  "I don't know, he was just a native, young
I think, but I don't know, it's difficult
to tell their ages and he was the, the first I'd seen
close. He wore a kimono with a short sword
in his belt, and the big one, all bloody and ready
again to ..." Her eyes had filled with tears.
  Babcott had gentled her and showed her a
room, gave her some tea with a touch of
laudanum, and promised he would call her the
moment Struan awoke.
  And now he's awake, she thought, her feet
leaden, nausea welling up inside her, head
aching and filled with vile pictures. I wish I
hadn't come here, Henri Seratard told me
to wait until tomorrow, Captain Marlowe was against
it, everyone, so why did I plead so ardently with the
Admiral? I don't know, we're jus' good
friends, not lovers or engaged or ...
  Or do I begin to love him, or was I only
consumed with bravado, playacting, because this whole,
horrid day has been like a melodrama
by Dumas, the nightmare at the road not real, the
Settlement inflamed not real, Malcolm's
message arriving at sunset not real:
"please come and see me as soon as you can,"
written by the doctor on his behalf--me not real,
just playacting the part of the heroine. ...
  Babcott stopped. "Here we are. You'll
find him rather tired, Mademoiselle. I'll just
make sure he's all right, then I'll leave you
alone for a minute or two. He may drop off
because of the drug, but don't worry, and if you want
me I'll be in the surgery next door.
Don't tax him, or yourself, or worry about
anything--don't forget you've had a rotten time
too."
  She steeled herself, fixed a smile on her
face and followed him in. "Hello,
Malcolm, mon cher."
  "Hello." Struan was very pale, and had aged,
but his eyes were clear.
  The doctor chattered pleasantly, peered at
him, quickly took his pulse, felt his forehead,
half nodded to himself, said that the patient was doing
fine and left.
  "You're so beautiful," Struan said,
his robust voice now just a thread, feeling
strange, floating yet nailed to the cot and the
sweat-sodden straw mattress.
  She went closer. The smell was still there as much
as she tried to pretend it was not. "How do you
feel? I'm so sorry you're hurt."
  "Joss," he said using a Chinese word that
meant fate, luck, the will of the gods. "You're so
beautiful."
  "Ah, ch@eri, oh how I wish all this had
never happened, that I'd never asked to go for a
ride, never wanted to visit to the Japans."
  "Joss. It's ... it's the next day,
isn't it?"
  "Yes, the attack was yesterday afternoon."
  It seemed to be difficult for his brain
to translate her words into usable form, and equally
difficult to compose words and say them, as she was
finding it equally difficult to stay. "Yesterday?
That's a lifetime ago. Have you seen Phillip?"
  "Yes, yes I saw him earlier but he was
asleep. I'll see him as soon as I leave
you, ch@eri. In fact I'd better go now, the
doctor said not to tire you."
  "No, don't go yet, please. Listen,
Angelique, I don't know when I'll be, be
it to travel so ..." Momentarily his eyes
closed against a barb of pain but it left him. When
he focused on her again, he saw her fear and
misread it. "Don't worry, McFay will see
that you're esc ... escorted safely back
to Hong Kong so please don't worry."
  "Thank you, Malcolm, yes I think I
should, I'll return tomorrow or the next day." She
saw the sudden disappointment and added at once, "of
course you'll be better then, and we can go together and
oh yes, Henri Seratard sent his condolences
..."
  She stopped, aghast, as a great pain took him
and his face twisted and he tried to double up but could
not, his insides tried to cast out the foul poison
of the ether that seemed to permeate every pore and brain
cell he possessed but could not--his stomach and
bowels already empty of everything possible--each
spasm tearing at his wounds, every cough ripping more
than the last with only a little putrid liquid coming
out for all the torment.
  In panic she whirled for the doctor and fumbled
for the door handle.
  "It's all right, Ange ...
Angelique," said the voice that she hardly
recognized now. "Stay a ... moment more."
  He saw the horror on her face and again
misread it, seeing it as anxiety, a vast depth
of compassion, and love. His fear left him and he
lay back to gather his strength. "My darling,
I'd hoped, I'd hoped so very much ... of
course you know I've loved you from the first moment."
The spasm had sapped his strength but his complete
belief that he had seen in her what he had prayed
for, gave him great peace. "I can't seem to think
straight but I wanted ... to see you to tell you
... Christ, Angelique, I was petrified
of the operation, petrified of the drugs, petrified
of dying and not waking up before I saw you again,
I've never been so petrified, never."
  "I'd be petrified too--oh, Malcolm,
this is all so awful." Her skin felt clammy
and head ached even more and she was afraid she would be
sick any moment. "The doctor assured me and
everyone that you'll be well soon!"
  "I don't care now that I know you love me,
if I die that's joss and in my family we know
we, we can't escape joss. You're my lucky
star, my lodestone, I ... knew it from the first
moment. We'll marry ..." the words trailed
off. His ears were ringing and his eyes misted a little,
eyelids flickering as the opiate took hold,
sliding him into the netherworld where pain existed but was
transformed into painlessness. "... marry in
springtime. ..."
  "Malcolm, listen," she said quickly, "you're
not going to die and I ... alors, I must be
honest with you ..." Then the words began pouring out,
"I don't want to marry yet, I'm not sure
if I love you, I'm just not sure, you'll have
to be patient, and if I do or do not, I don't
think I can ever live in this awful place, or
Hong Kong, in fact I know I can't, I
won't, I can't, I know I'd die, the thought of
living in Asia horrifies me, the stench and the
awful people. I'm going back to Paris where I
belong, as soon as I can and I'm never coming
back, never, never, never."
  But he had heard none of it. He was in dreams
now, not seeing her, and he murmured, "... many
sons, you and I ... so happy you love me ...
prayed for ... so now ... live forever in the Great
House on the Peak. Your love has banished
fear, fear of death, always afraid of
death, always so near, the twins, little sister Mary,
dead so young, my brother, father almost dead ...
grandfather another violent death, but now ... now
... all changed ... marry in springtime.
Yes?"
  His eyes opened. For an instant he saw her
clearly, saw the stretched face and wringing hands and
revulsion and he wanted to shriek, What's the
matter for God's sake, this is only a
sickroom and I know the blanket's sodden with
sweat and I'm lying in a little urine and dung and
everything stinks but that's because I'm cut for Christ's
sake, I've only been cut and now I'm
sewn up and well again, well again, well again
...
  But none of the words came out and he saw her say
something and jerk the door open and run away but this was
just nightmare, the good dreams beckoning. The door
swung on its hinges and the noise it made echoed
and echoed and echoed: well again well again well
again. ...

  She was leaning against the door to the garden, gulping
the night air, trying to regain her poise. Mother
of God, give me strength and give that man some
peace and let me leave this place quickly.
  Babcott came up behind her. "He's all
right, not to worry. Here, drink this," he said
compassionately, giving her the opiate. "It'll
settle you and help you sleep."
  She obeyed. The liquid tasted neither good nor
bad.
  "He's sleeping peacefully. Come along.
It's bedtime for you too." He helped her
upstairs, back to her room. At the door he
hesitated. "Sleep well. You will sleep
well."
  "I'm afraid for him, very afraid."
  "Don't be. In the morning he'll be
better, you'll see."
  "Thank you, I'm all right now. He ... I
think Malcolm thinks he's going to die. Is
he?"
  "Certainly not, he's a strong young man and
I'm sure soon he'll be as right as rain."
Babcott repeated the same platitude he had
said a thousand times, and did not tell the truth: I
don't know, you never know, now it's up to God.
  And yet, most times he knew it was correct
to give the loved one hope and take
away the burden of increased worry, though not
correct or fair to make God responsible
if the patient lived or died. Even so, if
you're helpless, if you've done your best and are
convinced your best and best knowledge are not good enough, what
else can you do and stay sane? How many young men have
you seen like this one and dead in the morning or the next
day--or recovered if that was God's will. Was it?
I think it's lack of knowledge. And then God's will.
If there is a God.
  Involuntarily, he shivered. "Good night, not
to worry."
  "Thank you." She put the bar in place and
went to the window, pushed open the heavy shutters.
Tiredness welled over her. The night air was
warm and kind, the moon high now. She took off
her robe and wearily towelled herself dry, aching for
sleep. Her nightdress was damp and clung
to her and she would have preferred to change but she had not
brought another. Below, the garden was large and
shadow-struck, trees here and there and a tiny
bridge over a tiny stream. A breeze
caressed the treetops. Many shadows in the
moonlight.
  Some moved, now and then.

                  

  The two youths saw her the moment she appeared
in the garden doorway forty yards away. Their
ambush was well chosen and gave them a good view
of the whole garden as well as the main gate, the
guard house and the two sentries they had been
watching. At once they crept deeper into the
foliage, astonished to see her, even more
astonished by the tears coursing her cheeks.
  Shorin whispered, "What's the matt--"
  He stopped. A wandering patrol of a sergeant
and two soldiers, the first to enter their trap, rounded
the far corner of the grounds, approaching them on the
path that skirted the walls. They readied, then
became motionless, their black, nearly skintight
clothes covered all of their bodies except their
eyes and made them almost invisible.
  The patrol passed within five feet and the two
shishi could have attacked easily and safely from this
ambush. Shorin--the hunter, the fighter and leader
in battle where Ori was the thinker and planner--had
selected the blind, but Ori decided they would only
attack a one- or two-man patrol,
unless there was an emergency or they were prevented from
breaking into the armory: "Whatever we do this time must
be silent," he had said earlier. "And
patient."
  "Why?"'
  "This is their Legation. According to their custom that
means it is their land, their territory--it is
guarded by real soldiers, so we're encroaching on
them. If we succeed, we will frighten them very much.
If they catch us we fail."
  From the ambush they watched the departing patrol,
noting the silent, careful way the men moved.
Ori whispered uneasily, "We've never seen
these sort before--soldiers so well trained and
disciplined. In a battle, massed, we would have a
hard time against them and their guns."
  Shorin said, "We'll always win, we'll have
guns soon, one way or another, and anyway
Bushido and our courage will swamp them. We can
beat them easily." He was very confident. "We
should have killed that patrol and taken their guns."
  I'm glad we didn't, Ori thought,
deeply unsettled. His arm ached badly and though
he feigned indifference he knew that he could not
sustain a long sword-fight. "If it wasn't
for our clothes they would have seen us." His eyes went
back to the girl.
  "We could have killed all three easily.
Easily. And grabbed their carbines and gone over
the wall again."
  "These men are very good, Shorin, not ox-headed
merchants." Ori kept the aggravation out of his
voice, as always, not wanting to offend his friend or
wound his sensitive pride, needing his qualities
as much as Shorin needed his--he had not forgotten
Shorin had deflected the bullet that would have
killed him on the Tokaid@o. "We've plenty
of time. Dawn's still at least two candles
away." This was approximately four hours.
He motioned at the doorway. "Anyway, she
would have given the alarm."
  Shorin sucked in his breath, cursing himself.
"Eeee, stupid! I'm stupid, you're right--
again. So sorry."
  Ori gave her all of his attention: what is
it about that woman that troubles me, fascinates me?
he asked himself.
  Then they saw the giant appear beside her. From
information they had been given at the Inn they knew
this was the famous English doctor who
achieved miracle healings for any seeking his
services, Japanese as well as his own people.
Ori would have given much to understand what the doctor
said to the girl. She dried her tears, obediently
drank what he offered her, then he guided her
back into the hallway, closing and barring the door.
  Ori muttered, "Astounding--the giant, and the
woman."
  Shorin glanced at him, hearing undercurrents that
further perturbed him, still angry with himself for
forgetting the girl when the patrol was nearby. He
could see only his friend's eyes and read nothing from
them. "Let's go on to the armory," he whispered
impatiently, "or attack the next patrol,
Ori."
  "Wait!" Taking great care not to make a
sudden movement that might be noticed, Ori
lifted his black-gloved hand, more to ease his arm
than to wipe the sweat away. "Katsumata
taught patience, tonight Hiraga counselled the
same."

  Earlier when they had reached the Inn of the
Midnight Blossoms, they had found to their joy
that Hiraga, their friend and the greatly admired leader
of all Choshu shishi, was also staying there. News
of their attack had arrived.
  "The attack was perfectly timed, though you could
not know it," Hiraga had said warmly. He was a
handsome man of twenty-two and tall for a
Japanese. "It will be like a stick plunged
into the Yokohama hornet's nest. Now gai-jin
will swarm, they're bound to go against the Bakufu who
won't, cannot, do anything to appease them. If
only the gai-jin retaliate against Yedo! If
they did that, and smashed it, that would be the signal for
us to seize the Palace Gates! Once the
Emperor is free all daimyos will rebel
against the Sh@ogunate and destroy it and all
Toranagas. Sonno-joi!"
  They had toasted sonno-joi and Katsumata
who had saved them, taught most of them and served
sonno-joi secretly and wisely. Ori had
whispered their plan to Hiraga to steal arms.
  "Eeee, Ori, it is a good idea and
possible," Hiraga said thoughtfully, "if you
are patient and choose the perfect moment. Such
weapons could be valuable on some operations.
Personally, guns disgust me--garrote, sword
or knife please me better--safer,
silent, and much more frightening, whoever the target--
daimyo or barbarian. I'll help. I can
give you a plan of the grounds and ninja clothes."
  Ori and Shorin brightened. "You can get them for
us?"'
  "Of course." Ninja were a highly secret
tong of expertly trained assassins who operated
almost exclusively at night, their special
black clothes helping to fuel the legend of their
invisibility. "At one time we were going to burn
the Legation building." Hiraga laughed and
emptied another flask of sak`e, the warmed wine
making his tongue looser than normal. "But we
decided not to, that it was more valuable to keep it under
observation. Often I've gone there disguised as a
gardener or at night as a ninja--it's
surprising what you can learn, even with simple
English."
  "Eeee, Hiraga-san, we never knew you
could speak English," Ori said, astounded by the
revelation. "Where did you learn it?"'
  "Where else can you learn gai-jin qualities
if not from gai-jin? He was a Dutchman from
Deshima, a linguist who spoke Japanese,
Dutch and English. My grandfather wrote a
petition to our daimyo suggesting that one such man
should be allowed to come to Shimonoseki, at their
cost, to teach Dutch and English for an
experimental one year, trade would come afterwards.
Thank you," Hiraga said as Ori politely
refilled his cup. "Gai-jin are all so
gullible--but such foul money worshippers. This is
the sixth year of the "experiment" and we still only
trade for what we want, when we can afford them--
guns, cannon, ammunition, shot and certain
books."
  "How is your revered grandfather?"'
  "In very good health. Thank you for asking."
Hiraga bowed in appreciation. Their bow in
return was lower.
  How wonderful to have such a grandfather, Ori thought,
such a protection for all your generations--not like us
who have to struggle to survive daily, are hungry
daily, and have desperate trouble to pay our
taxes. What will father and grandfather think of me now:
ronin, and my so-needed one koku forfeit? "I
would be honored to meet him," he said. "Our
shoya is not like him."
  For many years Hiraga's grandfather, an
important peasant farmer near
Shimonoseki and secret supporter of
sonno-joi, had been a shoya. A shoya, the
appointed, or hereditary, leader of a village
or grouping of villages with great influence and
magisterial power and responsibility for tax
assessments and collection, was at the same time the
only buffer and protector of peasants and
farmers against any unfair practices of the
samurai overlord within whose fief the village or
villages lay.
  Farmers and some peasants owned and worked the land but
by law could not leave it. Samurai owned all the
produce and the sole right to carry weapons, but
by law could not own land. So each depended on the
other in an inevitable, never-ending spiral of
suspicion and distrust--the balance of how much
rice or produce to be rendered in tax, year
by year, and how much retained, always an incredibly
delicate compromise.
  The shoya had to keep the balance. The advice
of the best was sometimes sought on matters outside the
village by his immediate overlord, or higher, even
by the daimyo himself. Hiraga's grandfather was one of
these.
  Some years ago he had been permitted
to purchase goshi samurai status for himself and
his descendants in one of the daimyo's offerings--a
customary ploy of all daimyos, normally
debt ridden, to raise extra revenue from
acceptable supplicants. The daimyo of
Choshu was no exception.
  Hiraga laughed, the wine in his head now.
"I was chosen for this Dutchman's school, and many
a time I regretted the honor, English is so
foul-sounding and difficult."
  "Were there many of you at the school?"' Ori
asked.
  Through the sak`e haze a warning sounded and
Hiraga realized he was volunteering far too
much private information. How many Choshu students
were at the school was Choshu business and secret,
and while he liked and admired both Shorin and
Ori they were still Satsumas, aliens, who were not
always allies, but frequently enemy and always
potential enemies.
  "Just three of us to learn English," he said
softly as though telling a secret, instead of
thirty, the real figure. Inwardly alert he
added, "Listen, now that you're ronin, like me and
most of my comrades, we must work closer
together. I am planning something in three days that you
can help us with."
  "Thank you, but we must wait for word from
Katsumata."
  "Of course, he is your Satsuma
leader." Hiraga added thoughtfully, "But at the
same time, Ori, don't forget you're ronin and
will be ronin until we win, don't forget we're
the spearhead of sonno-joi, we're the doers,
Katsumata risks nothing. We must--must--
forget that I am Choshu and you two Satsumas.
We've got to help each other. It's a good
idea to follow your Tokaid@o attack tonight and
steal guns. Kill one or two guards inside
the Legation, if you can, that will be a huge
provocation! If you could do it all silently and
leave no trace, even better. Anything
to provoke them."

  With Hiraga's information it had been easy
to infiltrate the temple, to count the dragoons and
other soldiers and to find the perfect lair. Then
the girl had unexpectedly appeared, and the
giant, and then they had gone back inside and ever
since both shishi had been staring at the garden
door, glazed.
  "Ori, now what do we do?" Shorin asked, his
voice edged.
  "We stick to the plan."
  The minutes passed anxiously. When the
shutters on the first floor opened and they saw her
in the window both knew that a new element had come
into their future. Now she was brushing her hair with a
silver-handled brush. Listlessly.
  Shorin said throatily, "She doesn't look
so ugly in moonlight. But with those breasts,
eeee, you'd bounce off."
  Ori did not reply, his eyes riveted.
  Suddenly she hesitated and looked down.
Directly at them. Though there was no chance she
could have seen or heard them, their hearts picked up
a beat. They waited, hardly breathing. Another
exhausted yawn. She continued brushing a moment
then put down the brush, seemingly so close that
Ori felt he could almost reach out and touch her,
seeing in the light from the room details of
embroidery on the silk, nipples taut beneath,
and the haunted expression he had glimpsed
yesterday--was it only yesterday?--that had stopped
the blow that would have ended her.
  A last strange glance at the moon, another
stifled yawn, and she pulled the shutters to. But
did not close them completely. Or bar them.
  Shorin broke the silence and said what was in both
their minds. "It would be easy to climb up there."
  "Yes. But we came here for guns and to create
havoc. We ..." Ori stopped, his mind flowing
into the sudden glimmering of a new and wonderful
diversion, a second chance, greater than the first.
  "Shorin," he whispered, "if you silenced her,
took her but didn't kill her, just left her
unconscious to tell of the taking, leaving a sign
linking us to the Tokaid@o, then together we kill one
or two soldiers and vanish with or without their
guns--inside their Legation--wouldn't that make
them mad with rage?"
  The breath hissed out of Shorin's lips at the
beauty of the idea. "Yes, yes it would, but
better to slit her throat and write
"Tokaid@o" in her blood. You go, I'll
guard here, safer," and when Ori hesitated he
said, "Katsumata said we were wrong
to hesitate. Last time you hesitated. Why
hesitate?"
  It was a split-second decision, then Ori
was running for the building, a shadow among many
shadows. He gained the lee and began to climb.

  Outside the guard house, one of the soldiers
said softly, "Don't look around, Charlie, but
I think I saw someone running for the house."
  "Christ, get the Sergeant, careful now."
  The soldier pretended to stretch, then strolled
into the guard house. Quickly but cautiously he
shook Sergeant Towery awake and repeated what
he had seen, or thought he had seen.
  "What did the bugger look like?"
  "I just caught the movement, Sar'nt, 'least
I think I did, I'm not sure like, it
might've been a bloody shadder."
  "All right, me lad, let's take a
look." Sergeant Towery awoke the Corporal
and another soldier and posted them. Then he led the
other two into the garden.
  "It were about there, Sar'nt."
  Shorin saw them coming. There was nothing he could do
to warn Ori who was almost at the window, still well
camouflaged by his clothes and the shadows. He
watched him reach the sill, ease one of the shutters
wider and vanish inside. The shutter
moved slowly back into place. Karma, he
thought, and turned to his own plight.
  Sergeant Towery had stopped in the center of the
path, and was carefully scanning the surroundings and
up at the building. Many of the shutters on the
upper story were open and unbarred so he was not
concerned, one of them creaking in the small wind. The
garden door was locked.
  At length he said, "Charlie, you take that
side." He pointed near to where the ambush was
hidden. "Nogger, you go opposite, flush 'em out
if any's there. Keep your bloody eyes open.
Fix bayonets!" He was obeyed instantly.
  Shorin eased his sword in its scabbard, the
blade also blackened for the night foray, then
settled himself into attack position, his throat
tight.

  The moment Ori had slid into the room, he
checked the only door and saw that it was barred, that
she was still asleep, unsheathed his short stabbing
sword and darted for the bed. It was a four-poster, the
first he had ever seen, everything about it strange, its
height and heavy permanence, posts, curtains,
bedclothes, and for a second he wondered what it would
be like to sleep in one, so high off the ground, instead
of the way Japanese slept, on futons--
light, square mattresses of straw--laid out
at night and put away by day.
  His heart was racing and he tried to keep his
breathing soft, not wanting to awaken her yet, not
knowing she was deeply drugged. The room was dark but
moonlight came in through the shutters and he saw
her long fair hair flowing over her shoulders and the
swell of her breasts and limbs under the sheet. A
perfume surrounded her, intoxicating him.
  Then the click of the bayonets and muttered
voices from the garden ... For a split second
he was petrified. Blindly he poised the knife
to end her, but she did not stir. Her breathing
remained regular.
  He hesitated, then padded noiselessly to the
shutters and peered out. He saw the soldiers.
Did they see me, or notice Shorin? he
asked himself in panic.
  If so then I'm trapped but that doesn't
matter I can still accomplish what I came
to accomplish and perhaps they'll go away--I have two
exits, the door and the window. Patience,
Katsumata always advised. Use your
head, wait calmly, then strike without hesitation
and escape when the moment arrives, as it always will.
Surprise is your best weapon!
  His stomach twisted. One of the soldiers was
heading for their hiding place. Even though Ori
knew exactly where Shorin was he could not pick
him out. Breathlessly he waited to see what would
happen. Perhaps Shorin will draw them off. Whatever
happens, she dies, he promised himself.

  Shorin watched the soldier approaching,
hopelessly trying to fathom a way out of the trap and
cursing Ori. They must have spotted him! If I
kill this dog there's no way I can reach the others
before they shoot me. I can't get to the wall without
being seen.
  Stupid of Ori to change the plan, of course
they spotted him, I told him that woman was
trouble--he should have killed her at the road ...
Perhaps this barbarian will miss me and give me enough
time to rush for the wall.
  The moonlight caught the long bayonet in
flashes as the soldier quietly probed the
foliage, lifting it apart here and there to see
better.
  Closer and closer. Six feet, five,
four, three ...
  Shorin stayed motionless, his face covering now
practically masking his eyes, and held his breath.
The soldier almost brushed him in passing, then went
on again, stopped a moment, on a few more paces,
probing again, then on again and Shorin began
quietly to breathe once more. He could feel the
sweat on his back but he knew he was safe now
and in a few moments would be safely over the
wall.
  From his position Sergeant Towery could watch
both soldiers. He held a cocked rifle
loose in the hands, but was as unsure as they were,
not wanting to give a false alarm. The night was
fine, wind slight, moonlight strong. Easy
to imagine shadows to be enemy in this stinking place,
he thought. Christ, wish we were back in good old
London town.
  "Evening, Sergeant Towery, what's up?"
  "Evening sir." Towery saluted smartly. It
was the Dragoon officer, Pallidar. He
explained what he had been told. "Might have
been a shadow, better safe than sorry."
  "Better get extra men and we'll
make sure that--"
  At that moment the young soldier nearest the ambush
site whirled on guard, his musket levelled.
"Sergeant!" he called out in excitement and
terror, "the bastard's here!"
  Already Shorin was rushing to the attack, his killing
sword on high but the soldier's training took
over for that instant and the bayonet expertly held
Shorin off as the others came running, Pallidar
jerking out his revolver. Again Shorin pressed the
attack but was inhibited by the length of the rifle and
bayonet, then slipped, scrambled out of the way
of the bayonet lunge and fled through the foliage for the
wall. The young soldier charged after him.
  "Watchiiit!" Towery shouted as the young man
crashed into the undergrowth, glands now in total
control propelling him to the kill. But the soldier
did not hear the warning and went into the bushes and
died, the short sword deep in his chest. Shorin
jerked it out, quite sure there was no escape, the
others almost on him.
  "Namu Amida Butsu"--In the Name
of the Buddha Amida--he gasped through his own
fear, commending his spirit to Buddha, and screamed
"Sonno-joi!" not to warn Ori but to make his
last statement. Then, with desperate strength he
buried the knife in his own throat.

  Ori had seen most of this but not the end. The
moment the soldier had shouted and charged he had
rushed pell-mell for the bed expecting her to be
startled awake but to his astonishment she had not
moved, nor had the calm tempo of her breathing
changed so he stood over her, knees trembling,
waiting for her eyes to open, expecting a trick,
wanting her to see him and see the knife before he
used it. Then there was the wail of "sonno-joi"
and he knew Shorin had gone onwards, then more
noise. But still she did not stir. His lips came
back from his teeth, his breathing strangled.
Abruptly he could stand the strain no longer so he
shook her angrily with his wounded arm, heedless of the
pain, put the knife to her throat, ready
to obliterate the scream.
  Still she did not stir.
  To him it was all dreamlike and he watched himself
shake her again and still nothing, then suddenly he
remembered that the doctor had given her a drink
and he thought, One of those drugs, the new Western
drugs Hiraga told us about, and he
gasped, trying to assimilate this new knowledge.
To make sure he shook her again but she only
muttered and turned deeper into the pillow.
  He went back to the window. Men were carrying the
soldier's body out of the foliage. Then he saw
them drag Shorin into the open by one of his feet like the
carcass of an animal. Now the bodies were
side by side, both strangely alike in death.
Other men were arriving and he heard people calling from some
windows. An officer stood over Shorin's
body. One of the soldiers tore off the black
head-covering and face mask. Shorin's eyes were
still open, features twisted, the knife hilt
protruding. More voices and other men arriving.
  Movement within the house now and in the corridor.
His tension soared. For the tenth time he made sure
the door bar was secure and could not be opened from the
outside, then moved into ambush behind the curtains
of the four-poster, near enough to reach her whatever
happened.
  Footsteps and knocking on the door. Splash
of light under it from oil or candle lamps. Louder
knocking and voices raised. His knife readied.
  "Mademoiselle, are you all right?" It was
Babcott.
  "Mademoiselle!" Marlowe called out.
"Open the door!" More pounding, much louder.
  "It's my sleeping draft, Captain. She
was very upset, poor lady, and needed sleep. I
doubt if she'll wake up."
  "If she doesn't I'll break the bloody
door down to make sure. Her shutters are
open, by God!" More heavy pounding.
  Angelique opened her eyes blearily.
"Que se passe-that-il? What is it?" she
mumbled, more asleep than awake.
  "Are you all right? Tout va bien?"
  "Bien? Moi? Bien s@ur ...
Pourquoi? Qu'arrive-that-il?"
  "Open the door a moment. Ouvrez la
porte, s'il vous pla@it, c'est moi,
Captain Marlowe."
  Grumbling and disoriented, she sat up in the
bed. To his shock, Ori watched himself allowing
her to reel out of bed and totter to the door. It
took her a little time to pull back the bar and half
open the door, holding on to it for balance.
  Babcott, Marlowe and a marine held candle
lights. The flames flickered in the draft.
They gaped at her wide-eyed. Her
nightdress was very French, very fine, and
diaphanous.
  "We, er, we just wanted to see you were all right,
Mademoiselle. We, er, we caught a man
in the shrubbery," Babcott said hurriedly,
"nothing to worry about." He could see that she
hardly understood what he was saying.
  Marlowe pulled his gaze off of her body and
looked beyond into the room. "Excusez moi,
Mademoiselle, s'il vous pl@ait,"
he said embarrassed, his accent tolerable, and eased
past her to inspect. Nothing under the bed except a
chamber pot. Curtains behind the bed this side
revealed nothing--Christ, what a woman! Nowhere
else to hide, no doors or cupboards. The
shutters creaked in the wind. He opened them
wide. "Pallidar! Anything more down there?"
  "No," Pallidar called back. "No
sign of anyone else. It's quite possible he was
the only one and the soldier saw him moving about. But
check all the rooms this side!"
  Marlowe nodded and muttered a curse and, "what
the hell do you think I'm doing?" Behind him the
four-poster curtains moved in the slight breeze
uncovering Ori's feet in his black tabi,
Japanese shoe-socks. Marlowe's candle
guttered and blew out, and when he slid the shutter
bar into place and turned back again he did not
notice the tabi in the deep shadows beside the bed,
or much of anything else, only Angelique
silhouetted in the doorway candlelight hardly
awake. He could see every part of her and the sight
drew his breath away.
  "Everything's fine," he said, even more
embarrassed because he had scrutinized her, enjoying
her when she was defenseless. Pretending to be
brisk, he walked back. "Please bolt the
door and, er, sleep well," he said, wanting
to stay.
  Even more disoriented, she mumbled and closed the
door. They waited until they heard the bar
grate home in its slots. Babcott said
hesitantly, "I doubt if she'll even
remember opening the door." The marine wiped the
sweat off, saw Marlowe looking at him and could not
resist a leering beam.
  "What the hell're you so happy about?"
Marlowe said, knowing very well.
  "Me, sir? Nuffink sir," the marine said
instantly, leer gone, innocence in its
wake. Sodding officers is all the same, he
thought wearily. Mucker Marlowe's as horny as
the rest of us, his eyes popped and he near ate
her up, short and curlies, wot's underneath and the
best bloody knockers I ever hoped to see! The
lads'll never believe about her knockers.
"Yessir, mum's the word, yessir," he said
virtuously when Marlowe told him to say nothing
about what they had seen, "Yor right sir, again
sir, notta word from me lips," he assured
him, and trailed along to the next room, thinking of
hers.

  Angelique was leaning against the door, trying
to make sense of what was happening--difficult
to put everything in order, a man in the garden, what
garden, but Malcolm was in the garden of the Great
House, no he's downstairs wounded, no that's a
dream and he said something about living in the Great
House and marriage ... Malcolm, was he the
man, the one who touched me? No, he told me
he would die. Silly, the doctor said he was
fine, everyone said fine, why fine? Why not good or
excellent or fair? Why?
  She gave up, her craving for sleep
overwhelming. The moon was shining through the slats of the
shutters and she stumbled through the bars of light to the
bed, gratefully collapsed into the soft down
mattress. With a great sigh of contentment she
pulled the sheet half over her and turned on her
side. In seconds she was deeply asleep.
  Silently Ori slid out of his hiding place,
astonished that he was still alive. Even though he had
pressed himself and his swords flat against the wall,
any proper search should have disclosed him. He saw
that the door bar was in place, the shutters barred,
the girl breathing heavily, one arm under the pillow
the other on the sheet.
  Good. She can wait, he thought. First, how
to get out of this trap? The window or the door?
  Not being able to see through the slats, he moved the
bar back softly and pushed one side open a
fraction, then the other. Soldiers were still milling
below. Dawn was almost three hours away. Clouds
building up, drifted towards the moon.
Shorin's body lay crumpled on the path like a
dead animal. For a moment he was surprised they
had left his head on, then remembered it was not
gai-jin custom to take heads for viewing or for
counting.
  Difficult to escape that way and not be seen.
If they don't slacken their vigilance I'll have
to open the door and try inside. That means leaving
the door open. Better to go by the window if I can.
  He craned out carefully and saw a small
ledge below the window that led under another window, then
around the building--this was a corner room. His
excitement mounted. Soon clouds will cover the
moon. I'll escape then. I will escape!
Sonno-joi! Now her.
  Making no noise he rearranged the bar so the
shutters were slightly open then came back to the
bed.
  His long sword was still sheathed and he put it within
easy reach on the rumpled white silk
counterpane. White, he thought. White sheet,
white flesh, white the color of death. Apt.
Perfect to write on. What should it be? His
name?
  Without haste he pulled the sheet away from her.
The nightdress was beyond his ken, alien, designed
to hide everything and nothing. Limbs and breasts, so
large compared to the few bedmates he had known,
legs long and straight with none of the elegant
curve he was used to from the women's many years of
kneeling-sitting. Again, her perfume. As his
eyes explored her he felt himself stirring.
  With the others it had been very different.
Excitement minimal. Much banter and deft
professionalism. Quickly consummated, and usually
in a sak`e haze to blur their age. Now there was
limitless time. She was young, and out of his world. His
ache increased. And the throb.
  Wind creaked the shutters but there was no danger
there nor was there any in the house. Everything
quiet. She lay half on her stomach. A
deft, soft push, and another, and obediently she
moved onto her back, her head comfortably to one
side, hair cascading. Deep sigh, snug in
the embrace of the mattress. A small golden
cross at her throat.
  He leaned over and put the tip of his
razor-sharp sword-knife under the delicate
lace at the neck, lifted slightly and settled
the blade against the tension of the garment. The material
parted willingly and fell away. To her feet.
  Ori had never seen a woman so revealed.
Or been so constricted. The throbbing intensified like
never before. The tiny cross shone. Involuntarily
her hand stirred lazily and went between her
legs, resting there comfortably. He lifted it
away, then moved one ankle from the other.
Gently.

                  

  Just before dawn she awoke. But not completely.
  The drug was still with her, dreams still with her,
strange violent dreams, erotic and crushing and
wonderful and hurting and sensuous and awful and never
before experienced or so intense. Through the
half-opened shutters she saw the eastern
horizon blood red, weird suggestive cloud
formations there that seemed to match etchings in her mind.
As she moved to see them better there was a slight
ache in her loins but she paid it no attention,
instead letting her eyes dwell on the pictures
in the sky and allowing her mind to drift back into the
dreams that beckoned irresistibly. On the
threshold of sleep she became aware she was
naked. Languidly she pulled her nightdress
around her and the sheet over her. And slept.
  Ori was standing beside the bed. He had just moved out
of the warmth. His ninja clothes were on the floor.
And his loincloth. For a moment he looked down at
her lying there, considering her a final time. So
sad, he thought, last times are so sad. Then he
picked up the short knife-sword and unsheathed
it.

  In the room downstairs Phillip Tyrer
opened his eyes. His surroundings were unfamiliar,
then he realized that he was still in the temple at
Kanagawa, that yesterday had been terrible, the
operation awful, his part despicable. "Babcott
said I was in shock," he muttered, his mouth parched
and bad-tasting. "Christ, does that excuse me?"
  His shutters were ajar, a wind creaking them. He
could see the dawn. "Red sky in the morning,
shepherd's warning." Will there be a storm? he
wondered, then sat up in the camp bed and checked
the bandage on his arm. It was clean, without fresh
bloodstains and he was greatly relieved. Apart from
the throb in his head and some soreness he felt
whole again. "Oh God, I wish I'd acted
better." He made an effort to remember the
aftermath of the operation but it was hazed. I know I
cried. It didn't feel like crying, the tears
flooded.
  With an effort he pushed the gloomy
thoughts away. He got out of bed and shoved the
shutters open, strong now on his legs and
hungry. Nearby there was water in a jug and he
splashed some on his face and rinsed out his mouth and
spat the water into the garden foliage. After he
had drank a little he felt better. The garden was
empty, the air smelling of rotting vegetation and
low tide. From where he was he could see a section
of the temple walls and the garden but little else. Through
a gap in the trees he caught a glimpse of the
guard house and two soldiers there.
  Now he noticed that he had been put to bed in
his shirt and long woolen underpants. His torn,
bloodstained coat was over a chair, his trousers
and riding boots, filthy from the paddy, beside it.
  Never mind, I'm lucky to be alive. He
began to dress. What about Struan? And
Babcott--soon I'll have to face him.
  There was no razor so he could not shave. Nor
was there a comb. Again never mind. He pulled on his
boots. From the garden he could hear the sound of
birds and movement, a few distant shouts in
Japanese, and dogs barking. But no sounds as in
a normal town, an English town, no morning
cries of "Hot Cross Buns-O" or
"Fresh water-O" or "Colchester
oysters, morning fresh, for sale for
sale-O," or "Direct from the press, the
latest chapter by Mr. Dickens, only a
penny, only a penny" or "The Times, the
Times, read all about Mr. Disraeli's great
scandal, read all about it ..."
  Will I be dismissed, he asked himself, his stomach
surging at the thought of returning home in
ignominy, a disaster, a failure, no longer a
member of Her Illustrious Majesty's
Foreign Office, representative of the greatest
Empire the world has ever known. What will Sir
William think of me? And what about her?
Angelique? Thank God she escaped
to Yokohama--will she ever talk to me again when she
hears?
  Oh God, what am I going to do?

  Malcolm Struan was also awake. A few
moments before some sixth sense of danger, a noise
from outside, had wakened him, though lying here it
felt as though he had been awake for hours. He
lay on the camp bed, aware of the day and the operation
and that he had been severely wounded and that
the chances were that he would die. Every breath caused a
sharp tearing pain. Even the slightest movement.
  But I'm not going to think about pain, only about
Angelique and that she loves me and ... But
what about the bad dreams? Dreams of her hating
me and running away. I hate dreams and being out
of control, hate lying here, loathe being weak when
I've always been strong, always brought up in the
shadow of my hero, the great Dirk Struan,
Green-eyed Devil. Oh how I wish I had
green eyes and could be so strong. He's my
lodestone and I will be as good as him, I will.
  As always the enemy Tyler Brock is stalking
us. Father and Mother try to keep most of the facts from
me but of course I've heard the rumors and know
more than they think. Old Ah Tok, more mother to me
than Mother--didn't she carry me until I was
two and teach me Cantonese and about life and
find me my first girl?--she whispers the rumors
to me, so does Uncle Gordon Chen who
tells me facts. The Noble House is
teetering.
  Never mind, we'll deal with them. I will. That's
what I'm trained for and have worked for all my life.
  He moved the blanket aside and lifted his
legs to stand but pain stopped him. Again he tried and
again failed. Never mind, he told himself weakly.
Nothing to worry about, I'll do it later.

  "More eggs, Settry?" Marlowe said, as tall
as the Dragoon officer but not as broad in the
shoulders. Both were patrician, sons of serving
senior officers, well formed in the face,
weathered, Marlowe more so.
  "No thanks," Settry Pallidar said.
"Two's my limit. Must confess that I think the
cooking here is vile. I told the servants I
like my eggs well done not phlegmy but they've sand
for brains. Actually, damned if I can eat
eggs unless they're on toast, on good English
bread. They just don't taste the same. What do
you think's going to happen, about Canterbury?"
  Marlowe hesitated. They were in the Legation
dining room at the vast oak table that could seat
twenty, brought from England for just this purpose. The
corner room was spacious and pleasing, windows
open to the garden and the dawn. Three liveried
Chinese servants served the two of them.
Places laid for half a dozen. Fried eggs
and bacon in silver salvers warmed
by candles, roast chicken, cold salt ham and
mushroom pie, a side of almost rancid beef,
hardtack biscuits, a dried apple pie.
Beer, porter and tea. "The Minister should ask for
immediate reparations and the murderers to be handed over at
once, and when there's the inevitable delay, he should
order the fleet against Yedo."
  "Better that we land in force--we've troops
enough--and occupy the capital, remove their king,
what's he called? ah yes, Sh@ogun, and
appoint our own native ruler and make Japan
a protectorate. Even better, for them, make
it part of the Empire." Pallidar was very tired and
had been awake most of the night. His uniform was
unbuttoned but he was groomed and had shaved. He
motioned to one of the servants. "Tea please."
  The neatly dressed young Chinese understood
perfectly but he gaped at him, deliberately,
for the amusement of the other servants. "Heya,
Mass'er? Tea-ah? Wat for tea-ah you say,
eh? Wancha cha, heya?"
  "Oh never mind for Christ's sake!"
Wearily Pallidar got up and went to the
sideboard with his cup and poured his own tea while
all the servants guffawed hugely but silently
at the insolent foreign devil's loss of face,
and then continued listening attentively to what they were
saying. "It's a matter of military might,
old boy. And I'll tell you frankly, the
General will be bloody upset about losing a
grenadier to a poxy assassin dressed like Ali
Baba. He'll want--and we'll all want--
revenge by God."
  "I don't know about a landing--the Navy can
certainly blast a path for you but we've no idea
how many samurai there are, nor anything about their
strength."
  "For God's sake, whatever they are, or it
is, we can deal with them, they're only a bunch of
backward natives. Of course we can deal with
them. Just like in China. Can't understand why we don't
annex China and have done with it."
  All the servants heard this and understood this and
all swore that when the Heavenly Kingdom
possessed the guns and the ships to equal the
barbarian guns and ships, they would help shove
barbarian noses in their own dung and teach them a
lesson to last a thousand generations. All of them were
handpicked by Illustrious Chen, Gordon Chen,
the Noble House compradore. "You
wan'ta one piecee plenty good 'ggs,
Mass'er?" the most courageous one said and beamed
toothily, holding more of the deliberately
phlegmy eggs under Pallidar's nose. "Werry
good."
  Pallidar shoved the salver away in disgust.
"No thanks. Listen, Marlowe, I think ..."
He stopped as the door opened and Tyrer came
in. "Oh, hello, you must be Phillip Tyrer
from the Legation." He introduced himself, then
Marlowe, and went on breezily, "Very sorry
about your bad luck yesterday but I'm proud
to shake your hand. Both Mr. Struan and Miss
Richaud told Babcott if it wasn't for you
they'd both be dead."
  "They did? Oh!" Tyrer could hardly
believe his ears. "It, it all happened so fast.
One moment everything was normal the next we were
running for our lives. I was frightened to death."
Now that he had said it aloud he felt better, and
even better when they brushed it aside as
modesty, held out a chair for him and ordered the
servants to bring him food.
  Marlowe said, "When I checked you in the night
you were dead to the world, we knew Babcott had
sedated you, so I expect you haven't yet
heard about our assassin."
  Tyrer's stomach reeled. "Assassin?"
  They told him. And about Angelique.
  "She's here?"
  "Yes, and what a brave lady she is."
For a moment Marlowe was filled with the thought of her.
He had no favored girl at home or
anywhere, just a few eligible cousins but no
special lady, and for the first time he was happy about
it. Perhaps Angelique will stay and then ... and then
we'll see.
  His excitement picked up. Just before steaming out of
his home port of Plymouth a year ago, his father,
Captain Richard Marlowe R.n. had said,
"You're twenty-seven, lad, you've your own
ship now--albeit a stinkpot--you're the eldest
and it's time you were married. When you get back from this
Far East cruise you'll be over thirty, with
any luck by then I'll be a Vice Admiral
and I'll ... well, I can allow you a few
extra guineas, but for God's sake don't
tell your mother--or your brothers and sisters. It's
time you made up your mind! What about your cousin
Delphi? Her father's service, though
only Indian Army."
  He had promised that on his return he would
choose. Now perhaps he would not have to settle for
second or third or fourth best. "Miss
Angelique raised the alarm in the Settlement
then insisted on coming here last night--Mr.
Struan had asked her to see him urgently--
seems he's not too good, pretty bad wound in
fact, so I brought her. She's quite a lady."
  "Yes." A curious silence took them, each
knowing the other's thoughts. Phillip Tyrer broke
it. "Why should an assassin come here?"
  The other two heard the nervousness. "More
devilment, I suppose," Pallidar said.
"Nothing to worry about, we caught the bugger. Have
you seen Mr. Struan this morning?"
  "I peeked in but he was asleep, hope he's
going to be all right. The op was not so good and ..."
Tyrer stopped, hearing an altercation outside.
Pallidar went to the window followed by the others.
  Sergeant Towery was shouting at a half-naked
Japanese from the far side of the garden, beckoning
him. "Hey you, come 'ere!"
  The man, apparently a gardener, was well
built and young and twenty yards away. He wore
only a loincloth and was carrying a bundle of
sticks and branches over one shoulder, some half
wrapped in a dirty black cloth, while he
awkwardly scavenged for others. For a moment he
stood erect, then began bobbing up and down, bowing
abjectly towards the Sergeant.
  "My God, these buggers have no sense of
shame," Pallidar said distastefully. "Even the
Chinese don't dress like that--nor Indians.
You can see his privates."
  "I'm told they dress like that even in winter,
some of them," Marlowe said, "they don't seem
to feel the cold."
  Again Towery shouted and beckoned. The man
kept on bowing, nodding vigorously, but instead of
going towards him, seemingly he misinterpreted
him and obediently turned away, still half-bowing,
and scuttled away, heading for the corner of the
building. As he passed their window he gazed at
them for an instant, then once more bent double in a
groveling obeisance and hurried towards the
servants' quarters, almost hidden by foliage, and
was gone.
  "Curious," Marlowe said.
  "What?"
  "Oh just that all that bowing and scraping seemed
put on." Marlowe turned and saw Tyrer's
chalky face. "Christ Almighty, what's
up?"
  "I, I, that man, I think he, I'm not
sure but I think he was one of them, one of the
murderers at the Tokaid@o, the one Struan
shot. Did you see his shoulder, wasn't it
bandaged?"
  Pallidar was the first to react. He jumped out
of the window, closely followed by Marlowe who had
grabbed his sword. Together they hurtled for the
trees. But they did not find him though they searched
everywhere.

  Now it was high noon. Again the soft knock on
her bedroom door, again "Mademoiselle?
Mademoiselle?" Babcott called out from the
corridor, his voice soft, not wanting to awaken
her unnecessarily but she did not reply. She
remained standing rock still in the center of the room and
stared at the bolted door, hardly breathing, her
robe tight around her, her face stark. The
trembling began again.
  "Mademoiselle?"
  She waited. After a moment his footsteps died
away and she exhaled, desperately trying to stop
shaking, then resumed pacing to the shuttered windows and
back to the bed and back to the window once more, pacing
as she had been pacing for hours.
  I've got to decide, she thought in misery.
  When she awoke a second time, not remembering
the first awakening, her mind was clear and she lay in
the crumpled bed linen without moving, glad to be
awake, rested, hungry, and thirsty for the first,
glorious cup of coffee of the day served with some
crusty fresh French bread that her Legation's
chef made in Yokohama. But I'm not in
Yokohama, I'm in Kanagawa, and today it will
be just a cup of revolting English tea with milk.
  Malcolm! Poor Malcolm, I do so
hope he's better. We'll return
to Yokohama today, I'll board the next steamer
for Hong Kong, thence to Paris ... but oh what
dreams I had, what dreams!
  The fantasies of the night were still vivid and
mixed up with other pictures of the Tokaid@o and
Canterbury's mutilation and Malcolm acting so
strangely presuming that they would marry. The
imagined smell of the surgery rose in
her nostrils but she fought it away, yawned, and
reached for her little timepiece which she had left on the
bedside table.
  With the slight movement came a small pain in
her loins. For a moment she wondered if it
presaged an early period for she was not
completely regular but dismissed the thought as
impossible.
  The timepiece read 10:20. It was inset with
lapis lazuli and had been her father's gift on
her eighteenth birthday, July 8th, a little over
two months ago in Hong Kong. So much has
happened since then, she thought. I'll be so
happy to be back in Paris, in civilization,
never to return, never never nev--
  Abruptly she realized that she was almost naked
under the sheet. To her astonishment she found that her
nightdress only clung to her arms and shoulders
and was totally split down the front and scrambled
up behind her. She lifted the two sides in
disbelief. Wanting to see better, she slid out
of bed to go to the window but again the slight soreness.
Now in the day's light she noticed the telltale
smear of blood on the sheet and found a trace
between her legs.
  "How can my period ..."
  She began counting days and recounting them but the
addition made no sense. Her last period had
stopped two weeks ago. Then she noticed that
she was slightly moist and could not understand why--then
her heart twisted and she almost fainted as her brain
shouted that the dreams had not been dreams but real and
that she had been violated while asleep.
  "That's not possible! You must be mad--that's not
possible," she had gasped, fighting for air,
fighting for space. "Oh God, let this be a
dream, part of those dreams." She groped for the
bed, heart pounding. "You're awake, this
isn't a dream, you're awake!"
  She examined herself again, frantically, and then
again but this time with more care. She had enough knowledge to know that there
was no mistake about the moisture, or that her
hymen was split. It was true. She had been
raped.
  The room began to spin. Oh God I'm
ruined, life ruined, future ruined for no
decent man, eligible man will marry me now that
I'm soiled, marriage a girl's only way
to better herself, have a happy future, any
future, no other way ...
  When her senses settled and she could see and
think, she found herself lying across the bed. Shakily
she tried to reconstruct the night. I remember
bolting the door.
  She peered at it. The bar was still in place.
  I remember Malcolm and the foulness of his
room and running away from him, Phillip Tyrer
sleeping peacefully, Dr. Babcott giving me
the drink and go upstair--
  The drink! Oh God, I was drugged! If
Babcott can operate with these drugs, of course
it could happen, of course I would be helpless but that
doesn't help me now! It happened! Say I
get a child!
  Again panic overwhelmed her. Tears gushed
down her cheeks and she almost cried out. "Stop
it!" she muttered, making a supreme effort for
control. "Stop it! Don't make a sound,
don't! You're alone, no one else can help,
just you, you've got to think. What are you going to do?
Think!" She took deep breaths, her heart
hurting, and tried to slam her jumbled mind
into order. Who was the man?
  The bar's still in place so no one could have come through
the door. Wait a minute, I remember
vaguely ... or was it part of the dream before the ...
I seem to remember opening the door to,
to Babcott and, and the naval officer Marlowe ...
then barring it again. Yes, that's right! At least,
I think that's right. Didn't he speak French
... yes he did, but badly, then they went
away and I barred the door, I'm sure I
did. But why did they knock on the door in the
night?
  She searched and re-searched her mind but could not
find an answer, not truly sure this had
happened, the night pictures slipping away.
Some of them.
  Concentrate!
  If not through the door he came through the window.
She squirmed around and saw that the shutter bar was
on the floor, below the window, not in its slots.
  So whoever it was got in through the window! Who?
Marlowe, that Pallidar or even the good
Doctor, I know they all want me. Who
knew I was drugged? Babcott. He could have
told the others but surely none of them would dare
to be so evil, would dare risk the consequences of
climbing up from the garden forof course I shall shout from
the rooftops ...
  Her whole being screamed a warning: Be
careful. Your future depends on being careful
and wise. Be careful.
  Are you sure that this really happened in the night?
What about the dreams? Perhaps ... I won't think
about them now but only a doctor would know for certain
and that would have to be Babcott. Wait, you could, you
could have ruptured that tiny piece of skin in your
sleep, twisting in the nightmare--it was a
nightmare, wasn't it? That has happened to some
girls. Yes, but they'd still be virgin and that
doesn't explain the moisture.
  Remember Jeanette in the convent, poor
silly Jeanette who fell in love with one of the
tradesmen, and allowed him, and excitedly told
us all about it later, all the details. She
didn't become pregnant but she was found out and the
next day she was gone forever and later we learned
she'd been married off to a village butcher, the
only man who would take her.
  I didn't allow anything but that won't help
me, a doctor would know for certain but that won't
help me, and the idea of Babcott or any
doctor being so intimate fills me with horror
and then Babcott would share the secret. How could
I trust him with such a secret? If it became
known ... I have to keep it secret! But how, how
can you, and what then?
  I'll answer that later. First decide who the
devil was. No, first clean yourself of this evil and
then you will think better. You've got to think
clearly.
  With distaste she shook off the nightdress and
threw it aside, then washed carefully and
deeply, trying to remember all the
contraceptive knowledge she possessed, what
Jeanette had done successfully. Then she put
on her robe and combed her hair. Using tooth
powder, she cleaned her teeth. Only then did
she look in her mirror. Very carefully she
examined her face. It was without blemish. She
loosed her robe. So were her limbs and breasts--
nipples a little red. Again she looked deep
into her mirror.
  "No change, nothing. And everything."
  Then she noticed that the little gold cross she
had worn forever, sleeping and waking, was gone. She
searched the bed carefully, then underneath and all
around. It was not buried in the bedclothes or under the
pillows or caught in the curtains.
Last chance--hiding in the lace of the coverlet.
She picked it off the floor and went through it.
Nothing.
  Then she saw the three Japanese characters,
crudely drawn on its whiteness, in blood.

  Sunlight sparked off the gold cross. Ori
was holding it in his fist by the thin chain, mesmerized.
  "Why did you take it?" Hiraga asked.
  "I don't know."
  "Not killing the woman was a mistake. Shorin
was right. It was a mistake."
  "Karma."
  They were safe in the Inn of the Midnight
Blossoms and Ori had bathed and shaved and he
looked back at Hiraga with level eyes and
thought, You're not my master--I will tell you only
what pleases me, nothing more.
  He had told him about Shorin's death and
climbing into the room, that she had slept soundly and
had not awakened but no more, only that he had hidden
there safely, then had taken off his ninja clothes
knowing he would be intercepted and had camouflaged his
swords with them, shinned down into the garden with just enough
time to gather some fallen branches, to pretend to be
a gardener before he was spotted and how, even after
recognizing the man from the road, had managed
to escape. But nothing more about her.
  How can I express in mortal words and tell
anyone that because of her I became one with the gods, that
when I had spread her wide and saw her I was
drunk with craving, that when I entered her, I
entered her as a lover and not a rapist, I don't
know why but I did, slowly, carefully, and her
arms went around me and she shuddered and held on
though she never truly awoke and she was so tight and
I held back and back and then poured forth in a
way inconceivable.
  I never believed it could be so marvelous, so
sensual, so satisfying, so final. The others were
nothing compared to her. She made me reach the stars but
that is not why I left her alive. I thought about
killing her very much. Then myself, there in the room.
But that would have been only selfish, to die at the
crest of happiness, so content.
  Oh how I wished to die. But my death belongs
to sonno-joi. Only that. Not to me.
  "Not killing her was a mistake," Hiraga
said again, interrupting Ori's thought pattern.
"Shorin was right, killing her would have
achieved our plan, better than anything."
  "Yes."
  "Then why?"
  I left her alive for the gods, if there are
gods, he could have said but did not. They possessed
me and made me do what I did and I thank
them. Now I am complete. I know life, all
that remains to know is death. I was her first and she will
remember me forever even though she slept. When
she wakes and sees my writing in my own
blood, not hers, she will know. I want her
to live forever. I will die soon. Karma.
  Ori put the cross into a secret sleeve
pocket of his kimono and drank more of the refreshing
green tea, feeling utterly fulfilled and so
alive. "You said you had a raid?"
  "Yes. We are going to burn the British
Legation in Yedo."
  "Good. Let it be soon."
  "It is. Sonno-joi!"

  At Yokohama, Sir William said
angrily, "Tell them again, for the last time,
by God, Her Majesty's Government demands
immediate reparations of one hundred thousand pounds sterling
in gold for allowing this unprovoked attack and
murder of an Englishman--killing Englishmen
is kinjiru by God! And also we demand
possession of the Satsuma murderers within three
days or we-will-take-definitive-action!"
  He was across the bay in the small, stuffy
audience room of the British Legation in
Yokohama, flanked by the Prussian, French
and Russian Ministers, both Admirals,
British and French, the General, all of them
equally exasperated.
  In line opposite, seated ceremoniously on
chairs, were two local representatives of the
Bakufu, the chief samurai of the Settlement
Guard, and the Governor of Kanagawa in whose
jurisdiction Yokohama lay. They wore
wide pantaloons and kimonos, and over them the
broad-shouldered, winglike mantle that was belted,
and two swords. Clearly all were uncomfortable
and inwardly furious. At dawn, armed soldiers
had hammered on the door of the Customs Houses,
in both Yokohama and Kanagawa, with rifle
butts and unprecedented anger, summoning the
highest officials and Governor to an immediate
conference at noon, the haste also
unprecedented.
  Between the two sides the interpreters sat on
cushions. The Japanese knelt, and the other, a
Swiss, Johann Favrod, sat
cross-legged, their common language Dutch.
  The meeting had already been in progress for two
hours--English translated into Dutch
into Japanese, into Dutch into English and back
again. All Sir William's questions were
misunderstood, or parried or needed repeating
several times, delays were "requested" in a
dozen different ways to "consult higher
authorities to institute examinations and
investigations" and "Oh yes, in Japan
examinations are quite different from investigations. His
Excellency, the Governor of Kanagawa,
explains in detail that ..." and "Oh His
Excellency, the Governor of Kanagawa,
wishes to explain in detail that he has no
jurisdiction over Satsuma which is a separate
kingdom ..." and "Oh but His Excellency, the
Governor of Kanagawa, understands the accused
drew pistols threateningly and are accused and
guilty of not obeying Japanese ancient
customs ..." and "How many foreigners did you
say were in the foreign party who should have knelt and
... but our customs ..."
  Tedious, time-consuming, and complex lectures in
Japanese by the Governor, put laboriously
into far from fluent Dutch and retranslated
into English.
  "Make it blunt, Johann, exactly as
I said it."
  "I have, every time, Sir William, but I'm
sure this cretin isn't interpreting accurately,
either what you say or what the Jappers say."
  "We know that for Christ's sake, has it ever
been different? Please get on with it."
  Johann put the words into an exact
translation. The Japanese interpreter flushed,
asked for an explanation of the word "immediate," then
carefully delivered a polite, appropriate,
approximate translation he considered would be
acceptable. Even then the Governor sucked in his
breath at the rudeness. The silence increased. His
fingers tapped a constant, irritated tattoo on
his sword hilt, then he spoke shortly, three
or four words. The translation was long.
  Johann said cheerfully, "Without all the
merde, the Gov says he'll pass
on your "request" at the appropriate time
to the appropriate authorities."
  Sir William reddened perceptibly, the
Admirals and General more so. ""Request,"
eh? Tell the bugger exactly: It's not a
request, it's a demand! And tell him further:
We demand an IMMEDIATE audience with the Sh@ogun in
Yedo in three days! Three days by God! And
I'm bloody arriving by battleship!"
  "Bravo," Count Zergeyev muttered.
  Johann was also weary of the game and gave the
words a fine-tuned bluntness. The Japanese
interpreter gasped and without waiting began a
flood of acrimonious Dutch that Johann
answered sweetly with two words that precipitated
an aghast, sudden silence.
  "Nan ja?" What is it, what's been
said, the Governor asked angrily, not mistaking
the hostility or hiding his own.
  At once, apologetically, the flustered
interpreter gave him a toned-down version but even
so the Governor exploded into a paroxysm of
threats and pleading and refusal and more threats that the
interpreter translated into words he considered the
foreigners wanted to hear, then, still rattled,
listened again and translated again.
  "What's he saying, Johann?" Sir
William had to raise his voice above the
noise, the interpreter was answering the Governor
and Bakufu officials, who were chattering amongst
themselves and to him. "What the devil are they saying?"
  Johann was happy now--he knew the meeting
would terminate in a few moments and he could
return to the Long Bar for his lunch and schnapps.
"I don't know, except the Gov repeats the
best he can do is to pass on your request etc.
at the appropriate etc. but there's no way the
Sh@ogun will grant you the honor etc. because it's
against their customs etc. ..."
  Sir William slammed the flat of his hand
onto the table. In the shocked silence, he pointed
at the Governor then at himself. "Watashi
... me ..." then he pointed out of the window
towards Yedo. "Watashi go Yedo!" Then he
raised three fingers. "THREE DAYS in a
bloody battleship!" He got up and stormed
out of the room. The others followed.
  He went across the hall to his study, to the
bank of cut-glass decanters and poured some
whisky. "Anyone care to join me?" he
said breezily as the others surrounded him.
Automatically he poured Scotch for the
Admirals, General and Prussian, claret for
Seratard, and a significant vodka for Count
Zergeyev. "I thought that went according to plan.
Sorry it was drawn out."
  "I thought you were going to burst a blood
vessel," Zergeyev said, draining his glass and
pouring another.
  "Not on your nelly. Had to close the meeting
with certain amount of drama."
  "So it's Yedo in three days?"
  "Yes, my dear Count. Admiral, have the
flagship ready for a dawn departure, spend the
next few days getting everything shipshape,
ostentatiously clear the decks for action, all
cannon primed, drills for the whole fleet, and
order them to be ready to join us in battle order
if need be. General, five hundred
Redcoats should be enough for an honor guard.
Monsieur, would the French flagship care to join
us?"
  Seratard said, "Of course. I will accompany
you, of course, but suggest the French Legation as
Headquarters, and full dress uniform."
  "No to the uniforms, this is a punitive
mission, not to present credentials--that comes
later. And no to the meeting place. It was our
national who was murdered and, how shall I put it?
Our fleet is the deciding factor."
  Von Heimrich chuckled. "It certainly is
decisive in these waters, at the present time."
He glanced at Seratard. "A pity I don't
have a dozen regiments of Prussian cavalry,
then we could partition the Japans without a hiccup and
have done with all their devious stupidity and
time-wasting bad manners."
  "Only a dozen?" Seratard asked witheringly.
  "That would be sufficient, Herr Seratard, for
all Japan--our troops are the best in the world
--of course after Her Britannic
Majesty's," he added smoothly.
"Fortunately Prussia could spare twenty,
even thirty regiments for just this small sector and
still have more than enough to deal with any problem we might
encounter anywhere, particularly in Europe."
  "Yes, well ..." Sir William broke
in as Seratard reddened. He finished his drink.
"I'm off to Kanagawa to make some
arrangements. Admiral, General,
perhaps a short conference when I return--I'll
come aboard the flagship. Oh, Monsieur
Seratard, what about Mademoiselle
Angelique? Would you like me to escort her
back?"

  She came out of her room in the late afternoon
sunlight and walked along the corridor and down
the main staircase towards the entrance hallway.
Now she wore the long bustled dress of
yesterday, elegant again, more ethereal than ever--
hair groomed and swept up, eyes enhanced.
Perfume and the swish of petticoats.
  Sentries at the main door saluted her and
mumbled an embarrassed greeting, awed by her
beauty. She acknowledged them with a distant smile
and went towards the surgery. A Chinese
houseboy gaped at her and scuttled past.
  Just before she reached the door, it opened.
Babcott came out and stopped. "Oh hello,
Miss Angelique, my word but you look
beautiful," he said, almost stuttering.
  "Thank you, Doctor." Her smile was kind,
voice gentle. "I wanted to ask ... can we
talk a moment?"
  "Of course, come in. Make yourself at
home." Babcott shut the surgery door,
settled her in the best chair and sat behind his
desk, swept up by her radiance and the way her
coiffure showed off her long neck to perfection.
His eyes were red-rimmed and he was very tired. But
then that's a way of life, he thought, glorying in
the sight of her.
  "That drink you gave me, last night, it was a
drug of some kind?"
  "Yes, yes it was. I made it fairly
strong as you were, you were rather upset."
  "It's all so vague and mixed up, the
Tokaid@o, then coming here and, and seeing
Malcolm. The sleeping drink was very strong?"
  "Yes but not dangerous, anything like that.
Sleep's the best cure, it would have been the best
kind, deep sleep, and by Jove, you slept
well, it's almost four. How do you feel?"
  "Still a little tired, thank you." Again the shadowed
smile and it tore at him. "How is
Monsieur Struan?"
  "No change. I was just going to see him again, you
can come along, if you like. He's doing well,
considering. Oh, by the way, they caught that
fellow."
  "Fellow?"
  "The one we told you about last night, the
intruder."
  "I don't remember anything about the night."
  He told her what had happened at her door
and in the garden, how one robber was shot and the other
spotted this morning but had escaped and it took
all of her will to keep her face clear and to stop
screaming aloud what she was thinking: you son of
Satan with your sleeping drafts and incompetence.
Two robbers? The other one must have been in my
room when you were there then and you failed to find him and
save me, you and that other fool, Marlowe, equally
guilty.
  Blessed Mother, give me strength, help me
to be revenged on both of them. And him, whoever
he is! Mother of God let me be revenged. But
why steal my cross and leave the other jewelry and
why the characters and what do they mean? And why in
blood, his blood?
  She saw him staring at her. "Oui?"
  "I said, Would you like to see Mr. Struan
now?"
  "Oh! Yes, yes please." She got up
too, once more in control. "Oh, I'm afraid
I spilt the jug of water on the sheets--would you
ask the maid to deal with them, please?"
  He laughed. "We don't have maids here.
Against Japper regulations. We've Chinese
houseboys. Don't worry, the moment you left
the room they'll be tidying ..." He stopped,
seeing her go pale. "What's the matter?"
  For an instant her restraint had left her and
she was back in her room again, scrubbing and cleaning
and petrified the marks would not come out. But they had
and she remembered she had checked and rechecked so
the secret was safe--nothing was left to show, neither
moisture nor blood, her secret safe forever
so long as she was strong and kept to the plan--must--
and must be clever, must.
  Babcott was shocked by the sudden pallor, her
fingers twisting the material of her skirt.
Instantly he was beside her and held her shoulders
gently. "Not to worry, you're quite safe, you really
are."
  "Yes, sorry," she said frightened, her head
against his chest, finding the tears were flowing. "It was
just, I, I was, I was remembering poor
Canterbury."
  She watched herself, out of herself, allow him to comfort
her, utterly sure that her plan was the only one,
the wise one: nothing happened. Nothing nothing
nothing.
  You will believe it until your next period.
And then, if it arrives, you will believe forever.
  And if it does not arrive?
  I don't know I don't know I don't know.

                  

    Monday, 15th September:
  "Gai-jin are vermin without manners," Nori
Anjo said shaking with rage. He was chief of the
roju, the Council of Five Elders, a
squat, round-faced man, richly dressed.
"They've spurned our polite apology which should
have ended the Tokaid@o matter, and now,
impertinently, formally request an audience with the
Sh@ogun--the writing is foul, words inept, here
read it for yourself, it has just arrived."
  With barely concealed impatience he handed the
scroll to his much younger adversary, Toranaga
Yoshi, who sat opposite him. They were alone
in one of the audience rooms high up in the central
keep of Yedo Castle, all their guards ordered
out. A low, scarlet lacquered table separated the
two men, a black tea tray on it,
delicate cups and teapot eggshell porcelain.
  "Whatever gai-jin say doesn't matter."
Uneasily Yoshi took the scroll but did not
read it. Unlike Anjo his clothes were simple
and his swords working not ceremonial swords.
"Somehow we must twist them to do what we want."
He was daimyo of Hisamatsu, a small though
important fief nearby and a direct
descendant of the first Toranaga Sh@ogun. At
the Emperor's recent "suggestion," and over
Anjo's flaring opposition he had just been
appointed Guardian of the Heir, the boy
Sh@ogun, and to fill the vacancy in the Council
of Elders. Tall, patrician and
twenty-six, with fine hands and long fingers.
"Whatever happens, they must not see the
Sh@ogun," he said, "that would confirm the legality
of the Treaties which are not yet properly
ratified. We will refuse their insolent
request."
  "I agree it's insolent but we still have to deal with
it, and decide about that Satsuma dog,
Sanjiro." Both were weary of the gai-jin problem
that had disturbed their wa, their harmony for two
days now, both anxious to end this meeting--Yoshi
wanting to return to his quarters below where Koiko
waited for him, Anjo to a secret meeting with a
doctor.
  Outside it was sunny and kind, with the smell of
sea and rich soil on the slight breeze that
came through the opened shutters. No threat of winter
yet.
  But winter's coming, Anjo was thinking, the ache in
his bowels distracting him. I hate winter,
season of death, the sad season, sky sad, sea
sad, land sad and ugly and freezing, trees
bare, and the cold that twists your joints, reminding
you how old you are. He was a greying man of
forty-six, daimyo of Mikawa, had been the
center of roju power since the dictator
tair@o Ii had been assassinated four years
ago.
  Whereas you, puppy, he thought angrily, you're
only a two-month appointee to the Council and a
four-week Guardian--both dangerous
political appointments implanted over our
protests. It's time your wings were clipped. "Of
course we all value your advice," he said,
his voice honeyed, then added, not meaning it as both
knew, "For two days the gai-jin have been
preparing their fleet for battle, troops
drilling openly and tomorrow their leader arrives.
What's your solution?"
  "The same as yesterday, official scroll or
not: we send another apology "for the regrettable
mishap" laced with sarcasm they will never understand,
from an official they will never know, and timed to arrive
before the leader gai-jin leaves Yokohama asking
for a further delay to "make enquiries."
If that does not satisfy him and he or they come
to Yedo, let them. We send the usual
low-level official, nonbinding on us to their
Legation to treat with them, giving them a little soup but
no fish. We delay, and delay."
  "Meanwhile it's time to exercise our hereditary
Sh@ogunate right and order Sanjiro to hand over
the killers for punishment at once, to pay an
indemnity, again through us, at once, and into house
arrest and retirement at once. We order him!"
Anjo said harshly. "You're inexperienced in high
Sh@ogunate matters."
  Keeping his temper and wishing he could
send Anjo into immediate retirement for his stupidity and
bad manners, Yoshi said, "If we order
Sanjiro we will be disobeyed, therefore we will be
forced to go to war, and Satsuma is too strong with
too many allies. There's been no war for two
hundred and fifty years. We're not ready for
war. War is ..."
  There was a sudden peculiar silence.
Involuntarily both men gripped their swords.
The teacups and teapot began to rattle. Afar
off the earth rumbled, the whole tower shifted
slightly, then again, and again. The quake persisted
for about thirty seconds. Then it was gone, as
suddenly as it had arrived. Impassively they
waited, watching the cups.
  No aftershock.
  Still no aftershock.
  More waiting throughout the castle and Yedo. All
living creatures waiting. Nothing.
  Yoshi sipped some tea then meticulously
centered the cup in its saucer and Anjo envied him
his control. Inwardly Yoshi was in turmoil and
he thought, Today the gods smiled on me but what
about the next shock, or the next, or the one after
that--any moment now, or in a candle of time or this
afternoon, or later tonight or tomorrow? Karma!
  Safe today but soon there will be another bad one,
a killer earthquake, like seven years ago when
I almost died and a hundred thousand people perished in
Yedo alone in the earthquake and in the fires that
always follow, not counting the tens of thousands washed out
to sea and drowned in the tsunami wave that swept
unheralded out of the sea that night--one of them my
lovely Yuriko, then the passion of my life.
  He willed himself to dominate his fear. "War
is completely unwise now, Satsuma is too
strong, the Tosa and Choshu legions will become
his allies openly, we're not strong enough to crush
them alone." Tosa and Choshu were fiefs, far from
Yedo, both historic enemy to the Sh@ogunate.
  "The most important daimyos will come to our
banner, if summoned, and the rest follow."
Anjo tried to hide the effort it took him
to unlock his grip on his sword, still terrified.
  Yoshi was alert and well trained, and noticed
the lapse and docketed it for future use,
pleased that he had seen into his enemy. "They
won't, not yet. They'll delay, bluster,
whine, and never help us smash Satsuma. They have
no balls."
  "If not now, when?" Anjo's fury spilled
out, whipped by his fear and loathing of earthquakes.
He had been in a bad one as a child, his father
becoming a torch, his mother and two brothers cinders
before his eyes. Ever since, with even the slightest
quake, he relived the day and smelled their
burning flesh and heard their screams. "We have
to humble that dog sooner or later. Why not now?"
  "Because we have to wait until we're better
armed. They--Satsuma, Tosa and Choshu--have a
few modern weapons, cannon and rifles, we
don't know how many. And several steamships."
  "Sold to them by gai-jin against Sh@ogunate
wishes!"
  "Bought by them because of previous weakness."
  Anjo's face reddened. "I'm not
responsible for that!"
  "Nor I!" Yoshi's fingers on the hilt
tightened. "Those fiefs are better armed than we
are, whatever the reason. So sorry, we have
to wait, the Satsuma fruit is not yet rotten
enough for us to risk a war that by ourselves we cannot win.
We're isolated, Sanjiro is not." His
voice became sharper. "But I agree that soon
there must be a reckoning."
  "Tomorrow I will ask the Council to issue the
order."
  "For the sake of the Sh@ogunate, you and all
Toranaga clans, I hope the others will listen
to me!"
  "Tomorrow we will see--Sanjiro's head should be
put on a spike and exhibited as an example
to all traitors."
  "I agree Sanjiro must have ordered the
Tokaid@o killing just to embarrass us," Yoshi
said. "That will madden the gai-jin. Our only
solution is to delay. Our mission to Europe
is due back any day now and then our troubles should
be over."
  Eight months before, in January, the
Sh@ogunate had sent the first official deputation
from Japan by steamship to America and Europe, with
secret orders to renegotiate the Treaties--
the roju considered them "unauthorized
tentative agreements"--with British, French
and American Governments, and to cancel or delay
any further opening of any ports. "Their orders
were clear. By now the Treaties will be voided."
  Anjo said ominously, "So, if not war, you
agree the time has come to send Sanjiro
onwards."
  The younger man was too cautious to agree
openly, wondering what Anjo was planning, or
had already planned. He eased his swords more
comfortably and pretended to consider the question, finding his
new appointment very much to his liking. Once more
I'm in at center of power. Oh yes,
Sanjiro helped put me here but only for his own
vile purpose: to destroy me by making me ever more
publicly responsible for all the troubles these
cursed gai-jin have brought, therefore setting me up
as a prime target for the cursed shishi--and
to usurp our hereditary rights, wealth and
Sh@ogunate.
  Never mind, I'm aware of what he and his
running dog Katsumata plan, what his real
intentions are against us, and those of his allies, the
Tosa and the Choshu. He won't succeed, I
swear it by my ancestors.
  "How would you eliminate Sanjiro?"
  Anjo's brow darkened, remembering his final
violent row with the Satsuma daimyo only a
few days earlier.


  "I repeat," Sanjiro had said
imperiously, "obey the Emperor's
suggestions: Convene a meeting of all senior
daimyos at once, humbly ask them to form a
permanent Council to advise, reform and run the
Sh@ogunate, quash your infamous and
unauthorized gai-jin agreements, order all
ports closed to gai-jin, and if they don't go,
expel them at once!"
  "I keep reminding you, it is only the
Sh@ogunate's right to set foreign policy, any
policy, not the Emperor's, nor yours! We
both know you've deceived him," Anjo had told
him, hating him for his lineage, his legions, his
riches, and obvious, abundant good health.
"The suggestions are ridiculous and unenforceable!
We've kept the peace for two and a half
cent--"'
  "Yes, for Toranaga aggrandizement. If you
refuse to obey our rightful liege lord, the
Emperor, then resign or commit seppuku. You
chose a boy to be Sh@ogun, that traitor
tair@o Ii signed the "treaties"--it's
Bakufu responsibility gai-jin are here and that
is Toranaga responsibility!"
  Anjo had flushed, driven almost mad by the
sneering malevolence and baiting that had gone on for
months and he would have gone for his sword if
Sanjiro had not been protected by Imperial
mandate. "If tair@o Ii hadn't
negotiated the Treaties and had them signed,
gai-jin would have bombarded their way ashore and by now
we would be humbled like China."
  "Surmise--nonsense!"
  "Have you forgotten Peking's Summer Palace
was burned and looted, Sanjiro-dono? Now
China is practically dismembered and government out
of Chinese control. Have you forgotten the British,
the main enemy, were ceded one of their islands, Hong
Kong, twenty years ago and now it's an
impregnable bastion? Tientsin, Shanghai,
Swatow now are permanent, self-contained
gai-jin dominated and owned Treaty Ports?
Say they took one of our islands in the same
way."
  "We would prevent them--we're not
Chinese."
  "How? So sorry but you're blind and deaf, and
your head's in the heavens. A year ago, the moment
the latest China war was over, if we'd provoked
them they would have sent all those fleets and armies
against us and overrun us as well. Only Bakufu
cleverness stopped them. We could not have stood against
those armadas--or their cannon and guns."
  "I agree that it's Sh@ogunate
responsibility we're unprepared,
Toranaga responsibility. We should have had
modern cannon and warships years ago, we have
had knowledge of them for years, didn't the Dutch
advise us dozens of times about their new inventions,
but you put our heads in the night buckets! You
failed the Emperor. At most you could have settled
for one port, Deshima--why give the American
fiend Townsend Harris, Yokohama,
Hirodate, Nagasaki, Kanagawa and allow
them access to Yedo for their impertinent Legations!
Resign and let others more qualified save the
Land of the Gods ..."

         END OF VOLUME I






 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume II of Twelve Volumes
       Pages i-ii and 219-448




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK ONE

                  

    Monday, 15th September: (continued)
  Remembering the clash made Anjo sweat, that
and the knowledge that much of what Sanjiro said was right. He
took a paper handkerchief from his voluminous
sleeve and wiped the sweat off his brow and shaved
pate and looked back at Yoshi, jealous of his
bearing and good looks but mostly of his youth and
legendary virility.
  Not so long ago it was so easy to be
satisfied, normal to be potent, he thought in
sudden misery, the ever present ache in his loins
reminding him. Not so long ago, easy to become
erect without effort and be abundantly charged--now
no longer possible even with the most desirable
person, their most clever skills, or rarest
salves and medicines.
  "Sanjiro may consider himself beyond reach, but
he's not," he said with finality. "Put your mind
on it too, Yoshi-dono, our young but oh so
wise Councillor, how to remove him, or your
own head may be on a spike all too soon."
  Yoshi decided not to take offense, and smiled.
"What do the other Elders advise?"
  Anjo laughed crookedly. "They will vote as
I say."
  "If you weren't kinsman, I would suggest you
resign or commit seppuku."
  "What a pity you are not your illustrious
namesake and you could actually order it, eh?"
Anjo got up heavily. "I'll send reply
now, to delay. Tomorrow we take a formal vote
to humble Sanjiro ..." Angrily he spun
on guard as the door was jerked open. Yoshi already
had his sword half out of its scabbard. "I
gave orders ..."
  The flustered sentry mumbled, "So sorry,
Anjo-sama ..."
  Anjo's fury vanished as a youth brushed the
sentry aside and hurried into the room, closely
followed by a girl, barely five feet tall,
both elaborately dressed and bubbling, four
armed samurai in their wake and, after them, a
matron and lady-in-waiting. At once Anjo
and Yoshi knelt and bowed their heads to the tatami.
The entourage bowed back. The youth,
Sh@ogun Nobusada, did not. Nor did the
girl, Imperial Princess Yazu, his wife.
Both were the same age, sixteen.
  "That quake, it knocked over my favorite
vase," the youth said excitedly, pointedly
ignoring Yoshi. "My favorite vase!" He
waved the door closed. His guards stayed, and his
wife's ladies. "I wanted to tell you I've
a wonderful idea."
  "So sorry about the vase, Sire." Anjo's
voice was kind. "You had an idea?"
  "We ... I've decided we, my wife and
I, we, I've decided we'll go to Ky@oto
to see the Emperor and ask him what to do about the
gai-jin and how to throw them out!" The youth beamed at
his wife and she nodded in happy agreement.
"We'll go next month--a State Visit!"
  Anjo and Yoshi felt their minds explode,
both wanting to leap forward and strangle the boy for
his lack of brains. But both kept their tempers,
both used to his petulant stupidity and
tantrums, and for the thousandth time, both cursed the day
the marriage of these two had been proposed and
consummated. "An interesting idea, Sire,"
Anjo said carefully, watching the girl without
watching, noting her concentration centered on him now
and that, as usual, though her lips smiled her
eyes did not. "I will put the suggestion before the
Council of Elders and we will give it our full
attention."
  "Good," Nobusada said importantly. He
was a small, thin young man, just five and a half
feet, who always wore thick geta, sandals,
to increase his height. His teeth were dyed
fashionably black as Court custom in
Ky@oto decreed, though not here in Sh@ogunate
circles. "Three or four weeks should be time
to prepare everything." Ingenuously he smiled at
his wife. "Did I forget anything,
Yazu-chan?"
  "No, Sire," she said prettily, "how could
you forget anything?" Her face was delicate and
made up in classic Ky@oto Court style:
eyebrows plucked and, in their place, high arching
eyebrows painted on the whiteness of her makeup,
her teeth dyed black, thick raven hair piled
high and held in place with ornate pins.
Purple kimono decorated with sprays of
autumn leaves, her obi, the intricate sash,
golden. Imperial Princess Yazu,
stepsister of the Son of Heaven, Nobusada's
bride of six months, sought for him since she was
twelve, betrothed at fourteen and married at
sixteen. "Of course a decision by you is a
decision and not a suggestion."
  "Of course, Honored Princess," Yoshi
said quickly. "But so sorry, Sire, such
important arrangements could not possibly be
made in four weeks. May I advise you
to consider the implications for such a visit might be
misinterpreted."
  Nobusada's smile vanished.
"Implication? Advise? What implications?
Misinterpreted by whom? By you?" he said rudely.
  "No, Sire, not by me. I just wanted to point
out that no Sh@ogun has ever gone to Ky@oto
to ask the Emperor's advice and such a precedent
would be disastrous to your rule."
  "Why?" Nobusada said angrily. "I
don't understand."
  "Because, as you remember, the Sh@ogun has the
sole hereditary duty to make decisions for the
Emperor, together with his Council of Elders and
Sh@ogunate." Yoshi kept his voice gentle.
"This allows the Son of Heaven to spend his time
interceding with the gods for all of us, and for the
Sh@ogunate to keep mundane and common
happenings from disturbing his wa."
  Princess Yazu said sweetly, "What
Toranaga Yoshi-sama says is true,
husband. Unfortunately the gai-jin have already
disturbed his wa as we all know, so to ask my
brother, the Exalted, for advice would surely be
both polite and filial and not interfere with
historic rights."
  "Yes." The youth puffed up his chest. "It's
decided!"
  "The Council will at once consider your
wishes," Yoshi said.
  Nobusada's face contorted and he shouted,
"Wishes? It's a decision! Put it to them if
you wish, but I have decided! I'm Sh@ogun,
you're not! I am! I've decided! I was chosen
and they rejected you--all loyal daimyos did.
I'm Sh@ogun, Cousin!"
  Everyone was aghast at the outburst. Except the
girl. She smiled to herself and kept her eyes
downcast and thought: at last my revenge begins.
  "True, Sire," Yoshi was saying, voice
level though the color was out of his face.
"But I am Guardian and I must advise
against--"
  "I don't want your advice! No one
asked me if I wanted a Guardian, I
don't need a Guardian, Cousin, least of all
you."
  Yoshi looked at the youth shaking with rage.
Once I was just like you, he thought coldly, a
puppet to be ordered this way or that, to be sent
away from my own family to be adopted by another,
or to be married, or banished and almost murdered
six times and all because the gods decided I would be
born the son of my father--as you, pathetic fool,
were born the son of your father. I'm like you in many
ways, but never a fool, always a swordsman,
aware of the puppeting, and now hugely different.
Now I am no longer a puppet. Sanjiro of
Satsuma doesn't know it yet, but he's made
me puppeteer.
  "While I am Guardian, I will guard and
protect you, Sire," he said. His eyes
flicked to the girl, so tiny and delicate,
outwardly. "And your family."
  She did not meet his eyes. No need. Both
knew that war was declared. "We are glad of your
protection, Toranaga-sama."
  "I'm not!" Nobusada screeched. "You were
my rival, now you're nothing! In two years
I'm eighteen and then I'll rule alone and you
..." He pointed a shaking finger at Yoshi's
impassive face, everyone appalled--except
the girl. "Unless you learn to obey I'll ...
you'll be banished to the North Island forever.
We-are-going-to-Ky@oto!"
  He swung around. Hastily a guard flung
the door open. All bowed as he hurried out.
She followed, then the others and when they were alone
again Anjo wiped the sweat off his neck. "She's
... she's the source of all his ... agitation, and
"brilliance,"" he said sourly. "Since she
arrived the fool's become even more stupid than
he was and not because he is fornicating himself blind."
  Yoshi hid his astonishment that Anjo would make
such an obvious though dangerous comment aloud.
"Tea?"
  Anjo nodded, morosely, jealous again of his
elegance and strength. Nobusada's not such a
fool in some ways, he was thinking. I agree with
him about you, the sooner you're removed the better,
you and Sanjiro, you're both trouble.
Could the Council vote to restrict your powers as
Guardian or banish you? It's true you send that
foolish boy mad every time he sees you--and her.
If it were not for you I could manage that bitch,
Emperor's stepsister or not. And to think that not
only was I in favor of the marriage but I put
tair@o Ii's stratagem into place, even
against the Emperor's opposition to such a match.
Didn't we refuse his reluctant first offer of
his thirty-year-old daughter, then his
one-year-old baby, until eventually, under
pressure, he agreed on his stepsister?
  Of course the close connection of Nobusada
with the Imperial family strengthens us against
Sanjiro and the outside lords, against Yoshi and those
who wanted him appointed Sh@ogun instead. The
connection will be all-powerful once she has a son
--that will mellow her and drain her venom. Her
pregnancy is overdue. The boy's doctor will
increase the dose of ginseng, or give him some
of the special pills to improve the boy's
performance, terrible to be so limp at his age.
Yes, the sooner she's carrying the better.
  He finished his tea. "I will see you at the
meeting tomorrow." Both bowed perfunctorily.
  Yoshi left and went out onto the battlements
needing air and time to think. Below he could see the
vast stone fortifications with three encircling moats
within moats and impregnable strong points and
drawbridges, the walls monstrous. Within the
castle walls were quarters for fifty thousand
samurai and ten thousand horse, along with
spacious halls and palaces for chosen, loyal
families--but only Toranaga families within
the inner moat--and gardens everywhere.
  In the central keep, above and below him, were the
most secure living areas and inner sanctum of the
reigning Sh@ogun, his family, courtiers and
retainers. And the treasure rooms. As
Guardian, Yoshi lived here, unwelcome and
on the fringe but also secure and with his own guards.
  Beyond the outer moat was the first protective
circle of daimyo palaces. These were vast,
rich, sprawling residences, then circles of
lesser ones, then even lesser ones, one such
residence for each daimyo in the land. All had
been sited by Sh@ogun Toranaga personally and
ordered constructed to conform with his new law of
sankin-kotai, alternative residence.
  "Sankin-kotai," he said,
"requires all daimyos to build at once
and maintain forever a "suitable residence" under my
castle walls in exact positions I have
decided, where he, his family and a few senior
retainers are to live permanently--each palace
to be lavish, and without defenses. One year in
three the daimyo will be allowed, and required,
to return to his fief and to stay there with his
retainers, but without his wife, consorts, mother, father
or children, or children's children, or any member of his
immediate family--the order in which daimyos leave or
remain is also to be carefully regulated according to the
following list and timetable ..."
  The word "hostage" was never mentioned though
hostage taking, ordered or offered to ensure
compliance, was an ancient custom. Even
Toranaga himself had been hostage when a child to the
Dictator, Goroda; his own family had been
hostage to Goroda's successor, Nakamura,
his ally and liege lord; and he, the last and
greatest, decided merely to extend the custom
into sankin-kotai to keep everyone in thrall.
  "At the same time," he wrote in his
Legacy, a private document for selected
descendants, "Following Sh@oguns are
ordered to encourage all daimyos to build
extravagantly, to live elegantly, to dress
opulently and entertain lavishly, the quicker
to divest them of their fief's yearly revenue of
koku which, by correct immutable custom belongs
only to the daimyo concerned. In this way all will
soon become debt ridden, ever more dependent on
us and, more important, without teeth--while we
continue to be thrifty and eschew extravagance.
  "Even so, some fiefs--Satsuma, Mori,
Tosa, Kii for example--are so rich that even
these extravagances will leave too dangerous a
surplus. From time to time the ruling Sh@ogun will
therefore invite the daimyo to present him with a few
leagues of a new trunk road, or palace,
or garden, pleasure place, or temple, such
amounts, times, and frequency are laid down in the
following document ..."
  "So clever, so far-thinking," Yoshi muttered.
Every daimyo in a silken net, powerless to rebel.
But all ruined by Anjo's stupidity.
  The first of the Emperor's "requests" brought
by Sanjiro to the Council--before Yoshi had
become a member--was to abolish this ancient
custom. Anjo and the others had
prevaricated, argued and finally agreed. Almost
overnight the rings of palaces emptied of all
wives, consorts, children, relations and warriors and
in days became a wasteland with only a few token
retainers.
  Our most important curb gone forever,
Yoshi thought bitterly. How could Anjo have been
so inept?
  He let his gaze drift beyond the palaces,
to the capital city of a million souls that
serviced the castle and fed off it, a city
crisscrossed with streams and bridges, most
constructed of wood. Now there were many fires--the
blossoms of earthquakes--all the way to the
sea. One great wooden palace was in flames.
  Yoshi noticed idly that it belonged to the
daimyo of Sai. Good. Sai supports
Anjo. The families are gone but the Council
can order him to rebuild and the cost will crush him
forever.
  Forget him, what's our shield against the
gai-jin? There must be one! Everyone says they could
burn Yedo but not break into the castle or sustain
a long siege. I do not agree. Yesterday
Anjo again told the Elders the well-known story
of the Siege of Malta some three hundred years
ago, how Turk armies could not pry even six
hundred brave knights from their castle. Anjo
had said, "We have tens of thousands of samurai
all hostile to gai-jin, we must win, they must
sail away."
  "But neither Turks nor Christians had
cannon," he had said. "Don't forget
Sh@ogun Toranaga breeched Osaka Castle
with gai-jin cannon--these vermin can do likewise
here."
  "Even if they did, we would have withdrawn
safely to the hills long since. Meanwhile every
samurai, and every man woman and child in the land--even
stinking merchants--would flock to our banner and
fall on them like locusts. We have nothing
to fear," Anjo had said contemptuously.
"Osaka Castle was different, that was daimyo
against daimyo, not an invasion. The enemy cannot
sustain a land war. In a land war we must win."
  "They would lay waste everything, Anjo-sama.
We would be left with nothing to govern. Our only
course is to web gai-jin like a spider webs its
far bigger prey. We must be a spider, we must
find a web."
  But they would not listen to him. What's the web?
  "First know the problem," Toranaga wrote
in his Legacy, "then, with patience, you can find the
solution."
  The crux of the problem with the foreigners is
simply this: how do we obtain their knowledge, armaments,
fleets, wealth and trade on our terms, yet
expel them all, cancel the unequal treaties,
and never allow one to set foot ashore without
severe restrictions?
  The Legacy continued: "The answer to all
problems for OUR land can be found here, or in
Sun-tzu's "The Art of War"--and patience."
  Sh@ogun Toranaga was the most patient
ruler in the world, he thought, awed for the millionth
time.
  Even though Toranaga was supreme in the land,
outside of Osaka Castle, the invincible
stronghold built by his predecessor,
Dictator Nakamura, he waited twelve
years to spring the trap he had baited, and lay
siege to it. The castle was in absolute
possession of the Lady Ochiba, the
Dictator's widow, their seven-year-old son
and heir, Yaemon--to whom Toranaga had
solemnly sworn allegiance--and eighty thousand
fanatically loyal samurai.
  Two years of siege, three hundred thousand
troops, cannon from the Dutch privateer
Erasmus of Anjin-san, the Englishman who
had sailed the ship to Japan, together with a musket
regiment also trained by him, a hundred thousand
casualties, all his guile and the vital
traitor within, before Lady Ochiba and Yaemon
committed seppuku rather than be captured.
  Then Toranaga had secured Osaka
Castle, spiked the cannon, destroyed all
muskets, disbanded the musket regiment, had
forbidden manufacture or the importation of all
firearms, he had broken the power of the
Portuguese Jesuit priests and Christian
daimyos, reallocated fiefs, sent all
enemies onwards, instituted the laws of the
Legacy, forbidden all wheels, the building of
ocean-going ships, and had, regretfully, taken
a third of all revenue for himself and his immediate
family.
  "He made us strong," Yoshi muttered.
"His Legacy gave us power to keep the land
pure, and at peace in the way he
designed."
  I must not fail him.
  Eeee, what a man! How wise of his son,
Sudara, the second Sh@ogun, to change the name
of the dynasty to Toranaga, instead of the real
family name of Yoshi--so that we would never forget
the fountainhead.
  What would he advise me to do?
  First patience, then he would quote Sun-tzu:
Know your enemy as you know yourself and you need not fear
a hundred battles; know yourself but not the enemy, for
every victory gained you will also suffer a defeat; know
neither the enemy nor yourself and you will succumb in every
battle.
  I know some things about the enemy, but not enough.
  I bless my father again for making me understand the
value of education, for giving me so many varied and
special teachers over the years, foreign as well
as Japanese. Sad I did not have the gift of
tongues and so had to learn through intermediaries:
Dutch merchants for world history, an English
seaman to check Dutch truth and to open my eyes
--just as Toranaga used the Anjin-san in his time
--and all the others.
  Chinese who taught me government,
literature and Sun-tzu's "The Art of War";
the old renegade French priest from Peking who
spent half a year teaching me Machiavelli,
laboriously translating it into Chinese characters for
me as his passport to live in my father's domains
and enjoy the Willow World he adored; the
American pirate marooned at Izu who told
me about cannon and about oceans of grass called
prairies, their castle called White House
and the wars with which they exterminated the natives of that
land; the Russian @emigr`e convict from a
place called Siberia who claimed he was a
prince with ten thousand slaves and told fables of
places called Moscow and St. Petersburg,
and all the others--some teaching for a few days, some for
months but never a year, none of them knowing who I
was, and I forbidden to tell them, Father so careful
and secretive and so terrible when aroused.
  "When these men leave, Father," he had asked
in the beginning, "what happens to them? They're
all so frightened. Why should that be? You promise
them rewards, don't you?"'
  "You're eleven, my son. I will forgive your
rudeness in questioning me, once. To remind you of my
magnanimity you will go without food for
three days, you will climb Mount Fuji alone and
you will sleep without covering."
  Yoshi shuddered. At that time he did not know
what magnanimity meant. During those days he
had almost died but achieved what was ordered of him.
As a reward for his self-discipline his father,
daimyo of Mito, had told him he was being
adopted by the Hisamatsu family and made
heir of that Toranaga branch: "You are my
seventh son. In that way you will have your own
inheritance, and be of a slightly higher lineage
than your brothers."
  "Yes Father," he had said, holding back his
tears. At that time he did not know he was being
groomed to be Sh@ogun, nor was he ever told.
Then, when Sh@ogun Iyeyoshi died of the spotted
disease four years ago and he was twenty-two and
ready and proposed by his father, tair@o Ii had
opposed him, and won--Ii's personal forces
possessed the Palace Gates.
  So his cousin Nobusada was appointed.
Yoshi, his family, his father and all their
influential supporters were ordered into severe
house arrest. Only when Ii was assassinated was
he freed and reinstated with his lands and honors,
along with the others who survived. His father had died
in house confinement.
  I should have been Sh@ogun, he thought for the ten
millionth time. I was ready, trained and could have
stopped the Sh@ogunate rot, could have formed a new
bond between Sh@ogunate and all daimyos, and could
have dealt with the gai-jin. I should have had that
Princess as wife, I would never have signed those
agreements, or allowed the negotiations to go so
badly against us. I would have dealt with Townsend
Harris and begun a new era of careful change
to accommodate the world outside, at our pace, not
theirs!
  Meanwhile I am not Sh@ogun, Nobusada
is elected Sh@ogun correctly, the
Treaties exist, Princess Yazu exists,
Sanjiro, Anjo and gai-jin are battering at
our gates.
  He shivered. I had better be even more
careful. Poison is an ancient art, an arrow
by day or by night, ninja assassins in their
hundreds are out there, ready for hire. And then there
are the shishi. There must be an answer! What is
it?
  Sea birds circling and cawing over
the city and castle interrupted his thought patterns.
He studied the sky. No sign of change, or
tempest, though this was the month of change when the
big winds came and, with them winter. Winter will be
bad this year. Not a famine like three years ago
but the harvest is poor, even less than last
year ...
  Wait! What was it Anjo said that reminded me
of something?
  He turned and beckoned one of his
bodyguards, his excitement rising. "Bring that
spy here, the fisherman, what's his name? Ah
yes, Misamoto, bring him to my quarters
secretly at once--he's confined in the Eastern
Guard House."

                  

    Tuesday, 16th September:
  Precisely at dawn the cannon of the
flagship bellowed the eleven-gun salute as
Sir William's cutter came alongside the
gangway. From the shore came a faint cheer, every
sober man there to watch the departure of the fleet for
Yedo. The wind was strengthening, sea fair, light
overcast. He was formally piped aboard,
Phillip Tyrer in attendance--the rest of his
staff already aboard accompanying warships. The
two men wore frock coats and top hats.
Tyrer's arm was in a sling.
  They saw Admiral Ketterer waiting for them
on the main deck, John Marlowe beside him, both
in dress uniform--cocked hats, gold braided
and buttoned blue cutaways, with white shirts,
waistcoats, breeches and stockings, buckled
shoes and gleaming swords--and, immediately,
Phillip Tyrer thought Damn, how handsome and
elegant yet masculine John Marlowe always
is, just like Pallidar in his uniform. Damned if
I have any dress clothes, or any clothes for that
matter to rival them, and poor as a church mouse
compared to them and not even a Deputy Secretary
yet. Damn! There's nothing like a uniform
to flatter a man and give him standing with a girl
...
  He almost stumbled into Sir William who had
stopped on the top step as the Admiral and
Marlowe saluted politely, ignoring him.
Blast, he thought, concentrate, you're equally on
duty, equally at the beck and call of the
Mighty! Be careful, become part of the scenery
too, Wee Willie Winkie's been like a cat
with a hornet in his bum since you reported
yesterday.
  "'Morning, Sir William, welcome
aboard."
  "Thank you. Good morning to you, Admiral
Ketterer," Sir William doffed his hat,
followed by Tyrer, their frock coats tugged by the
breeze. "Set sail, if you please. The other
Ministers are on the French flagship."
  "Good." The Admiral motioned to Marlowe.
At once Marlowe saluted, went to the Captain
who was on the open bridge, just forward of the single
funnel and main mast, and saluted again.
"Admiral's compliments, sir. Make way for
Yedo."
  The commands went rapidly down the line, the
sailors gave three cheers, in moments the
anchors were being chanted aboard and in the cramped
boiler room three decks below, teams of
stokers, stripped to the waist, shoveled more coal
into the furnaces to another rhythmic chant, coughing
and wheezing in air permanently fouled with coal
dust. The other side of the bulkhead in the engine
room, the chief Engineer engaged "half ahead,"
and the huge reciprocating engines began to turn the
propeller shaft.
  She was H.m.s. Euryalus, built at
Chatham eight years ago, a three-masted,
one-funnel, screw-assisted, wooden cruiser
frigate of 3,200 tons burthen, with 35
guns, a normal complement of 350 officers,
seamen and marines--while below decks were 90
stokers and engine room staff. Today all sails
were sparred and decks cleared for action.
  "A pleasant day, Admiral," Sir
William was saying. They were on the quarterdeck,
Phillip Tyrer and Marlowe, who had greeted
each other silently, hovering close by.
  "For the moment," the Admiral agreed testily,
always uncomfortable near civilians, particularly
someone like Sir William who was his senior in
rank. "My quarters are available to you below you
if you wish."
  "Thank you." Sea gulls were dipping and cawing
around their wake. Sir William studied them for a
moment, trying to throw off his depression. "Thank
you but I'd rather be on deck. You haven't met
Mr. Tyrer, I believe? He's our
new apprentice interpreter."
  For the first time the Admiral acknowledged Tyrer.
"Welcome aboard, Mr. Tyrer, we can
certainly use Japanese speakers here. How's
your wound?"
  "Not too bad, sir, thank you," Tyrer said,
trying to retreat once more into anonymity.
  "Good. Rotten business." The Admiral's
pale blue eyes ranged the sea and his ship, his
face florid and weatherbeaten, with heavy jowls and a
choleric roll of flesh on the back of his neck
over his starched collar. For a moment he watched the
smoke critically, noting its color and smell,
then grunted and brushed some specks of coal dust
off his impeccable waistcoat.
  "Something's amiss?"
  "No, Sir William. The coals we get
here don't compare with Shanghai best, or good
Welsh or Yorkshire coals. Too much
clinker in it. It's cheap enough when we can get it but
that's not often. You should insist on an increased
supply, it's a major problem for us here,
major."
  Sir William nodded wearily. "I have but
they don't appear to have any locally."
  "Filthy stuff, wherever it comes from. We can't
use sail today, not with this wind against us. Engine
assists are perfect for this sort of exercise and
close inshore maneuvers, or docking. With the
best man-of-war afloat, under sails, even a
tea clipper--we'd take five times as long
to get to Yedo and not have enough sea room for safety.
More's the pity."
  Sir William was out of humor after another
sleepless night and reacted instantly to the
Admiral's discourtesy and stupidity telling him
something that was obvious. "Really?" he said thinly.
"Never mind, soon we'll have a completely
stinkpot navy, no sail at all and that will be
that."
  Tyrer hid a smile as the Admiral flushed
for this was a sore point with naval officers and
widely discussed in the London newspapers who
blithely dubbed future fleets as "Stink
pots of various sizes, commanded by stink potters of
various sizes, who will be dressed accordingly."
  "That won't happen in the foreseeable future and
never for long-haul cruising, blockades or
battle fleets." The Admiral almost spat the
words out. "There's no way we can carry
all the coal we need between ports and still have fighting
ships. We must have sails to conserve fuel.
Civilians have little understanding of naval matters
..." This reminded him of the present Liberal
government's attack on the current Navy
estimates and his blood pressure went up
another notch. "Meanwhile to secure our sea
lanes and keep the Empire inviolate, as a
corner stone of government policy the Royal
Navy must maintain the equation of twice as many
ships--wooden or ironclads, steam and sail--
as the next two other navies combined, with the biggest
and best engines and most modern cannon, shells,
and explosives in the world."
  "An admirable idea, but now out of date, not
practical, and I'm afraid too rich for the
Chancellor of the Exchequer and government
to stomach."
  "It better not be, by God." The roll of
neck flesh went pink. "Mr. Pennypinching
Gladstone better learn right smartly where his
priorities lie. I've said it before: the sooner
the Liberals are out and the Tories back in power
the better! Not because of them, thank God the
Royal Navy still has enough ships and firepower
to sink any French, Russian or American
fleets in their home waters if need be. But
say those three combine against us in the coming conflict?"
Irritably the Admiral turned and bellowed
though Marlowe was close by, "Mr. Marlowe!
Signal the Pearl! She's out of station,
by God!"
  "Aye aye sir!" Marlowe left at once.
  Sir William glanced astern, seeing nothing
amiss with the following ships, then again concentrated
on the Admiral. "Foreign Secretary
Russell's too clever to be drawn into it.
Prussia will war on France, Russia will stay
out, the Americans are too involved with their
civil war, Spanish Cuba and Philippines,
and sniffing around the Hawaiian islands. By the
way, I've proposed we annex one or two
of those islands before the Americans do, they'd make
perfect coaling stations ..."
  Marlowe was sourly heading for the signalman, his
eyes on H.m.s. Pearl, his ship, a
Jason-class three-masted, single-funneled,
21-gun, screw frigate of 2,100 tons
burthen, temporarily in the command of his Number
One, Lieutenant Lloyd, wishing he
was aboard her and no longer the Admiral's
lackey. He gave the signalman the
message, watched him use the signal flags and
read the reply before the young man reported, "He
says sorry, sorr."
  "How long have you been a signalman?"
  "Three months sir."
  "You'd best look up your codes, right
smartly. The message said: "Captain
Lloyd of H.m.s. Pearl
apologizes." Make another mistake and your
balls are in the wringer."
  "Yessir, sorry sir," the crestfallen
youth said.
  Marlowe went back to the Admiral. To his
relief the potential row between the two men seemed
to have simmered down and now they were discussing
alternative plans of action at Yedo and the long
term implications of the Tokaid@o attack.
While he waited for a lull in the conversation, he
cautiously cocked an eyebrow at Tyrer--who
smiled back--wanting to be dismissed so he could
ask him about Kanagawa and Angelique. He
had had to leave the same day Sir William had
arrived, three days ago, and had no first-hand
information on what had occurred since then.
  "Yes, Mr. Marlowe?" The Admiral
listened to the message and at once rasped:
"Send another signal: report aboard my
flagship at sunset." He saw Marlowe
wince. "And well you might, Mr. Marlowe.
Such an apology is insufficient excuse for
slackness in my fleet. Is it?"
  "No sir."
  "Consider who should take over your ship in his
place--not you!" Admiral Ketterer turned
back to Sir William. "You were saying? You
don't th--" A gust crackled the rigging.
Both officers looked aloft, then at the sky and
all around, tasting the wind. No sign of danger
yet, though both knew that the weather this month was
unpredictable and in these waters storms came
suddenly. "You were saying? You don't think the
authorities, this Bakufu, will do what we
require?"
  "No, not without some form of force. At midnight
I got another apology from them and a request for a
month's delay so they could "consult higher
ups" and more such nonsense--my God, they can
prevaricate. I sent the bloody
messenger back with a flea in his ear and a curt, rather
rude message to give us satisfaction or
else."
  "Quite right."
  "When we anchor off Yedo, can we fire as
many salutes as possible, create an entrance?"
  "We'll make it 21 guns, a royal
salute. I suppose this mission could be construed
as a formal visit to their Royalty." Without
turning, the Admiral rasped: "Mr. Marlowe,
give the order, for the whole fleet and ask the
French Admiral if he would do likewise."
  "Yessir." Again Marlowe saluted and rushed
off.
  "The plan for Yedo is still as we agreed?"
  Sir William nodded. "Yes. I and my
party will go ashore to the Legation--a hundred
soldiers as an honor guard should be enough, the
Highlanders, their uniforms and bagpipes will be the
most impressive. The rest of the plan remains
the same."
  "Good." Uneasily the Admiral stared
ahead. "We'll be able to see Yedo when we get
around that headland." His face hardened. "It's one
thing to rattle a few sabres and fire off a
few blank cannonades but I don't agree
to bombard and burn that city--without a legal state
of war."
  Sir William said carefully, "Let's
hope I don't have to ask Lord Palmerston
to declare one, or for me to legalize one forced on
us. A full report's on the way to him.
Meanwhile his reply is four months away so
we have to do the best we can, as usual. These
murders must stop, the Bakufu must be brought
to heel, one way or another. Now is the
perfect time."
  "Admiralty instructions are to be prudent."
  "By the same post I sent an urgent
message to the Governor of Hong Kong also
advising him what I planned to do and asking what
reinforcements in ships and men could be available if
necessary, and about Mr. Struan's condition."
  "Oh? When was that, Sir William?"
  "Yesterday. Struan's had a clipper
available, Mr. McFay agreed the matter
merited the most immediate haste."
  Ketterer said caustically, "This whole incident
seems to be a Struan cause c@el@ebre, the
fellow who was killed hardly gets a
mention, it's nothing but Struan, Struan,
Struan."
  "The Governor's a personal friend of the
family, and the family is, er, very well
connected, very important to Her Majesty's
trading interests in Asia and China. V."
  "They've always sounded like a bunch of pirates
to me, gunrunning, opium running, anything for a
profit."
  "Both are legal enterprises, my dear
Admiral. Struan's are highly respectable,
Admiral, with very important connections in
Parliament."
  The Admiral was unimpressed. "A lot of
ne'er-do-wells there too, by God, if you don't
mind my saying. Bloody idiots most of the time,
trying to cut Navy funds and our fleets--
stupid when England depends on sea power."
  "I agree we need the best Navy with the most
competent officers to carry out Imperial
policy," Sir William said. Marlowe, near
the Admiral, heard the thinly veiled barb. A
quick glance at the back of his superior's neck
confirmed the barb had registered. He braced for the
inevitable.
  "Imperial policy? Seems to me," the
Admiral said sharply, "the Navy spends most
of its time pulling civilian and trader fingers out
of their smelly holes when their greed or
double-dealing takes them into messes they should never have
been in in the first place. As for those bastards
there," his stubby finger pointed at Yokohama on
the port side, "they're the worst bunch of
scallywags I've ever seen."
  "Some are, most not, Admiral." Sir
William's chin came out. "Without traders and
trade there'd be no money, no Empire and no
Navy."
  The red neck became purple. "Without the
Navy there would be no trade and England would not have
become the greatest nation in the world, the richest, with the
greatest Empire the world has ever seen,
by God."
  Balls, Sir William wanted to shout, but
he knew that if he did, here on the quarterdeck
of the flagship, the Admiral would have apoplexy,
Marlowe and every sailor within hearing distance would
faint. The thought amused him and removed most of the
venom that sleepless nights worrying over the
Tokaid@o affair had caused, and
permitted him to be diplomatic. "The Navy
is the senior service, Admiral. And many share
your opinion. I trust we'll be on time?"
  "Yes, yes we will." The Admiral eased his
shoulders, somewhat mollified, his head aching from the
bottle of port he had consumed after dinner, on
top of the claret. The ship was making about seven
knots, into wind, which pleased him. He checked the
lie of the fleet. Now H.m.s. Pearl was very
carefully astern, with two 10-gun paddle
sloops to port. The French flagship, a
three-masted, 20-gun ironclad paddle
frigate was carelessly to starboard. "Her
helmsman should be put in irons! She could do with a
new coat of paint, new rigging, fumigating
to get rid of the garlic, and a bloody good
holy-stoning and their crew keelhauled. Don't
you agree, Mr. Marlowe?"
  "Yes sir."
  When he was satisfied all was correct, the
Admiral then turned back to Sir William.
"This, this Struan family and their so-called Noble
House, is it really so important?"
  "Yes. Their trade is enormous, their
influence in Asia, notably in China without
compare, except for Brock and Sons."
  "I've seen their clippers of course.
Beauties, and very well armed." The Admiral
added bluntly, "I hope to Christ they don't
try to peddle opium, or guns here."
  "Personally I agree though it's not against
present law."
  "It is, according to Chinese law. Or
Japan's."
  "Yes, but there are mitigating circumstances,"
Sir William said wearily. He had been through
the same explanation dozens of times. "I'm
sure you know Chinese will only accept cash,
silver or gold, for the tea we must import,
nothing else. The only merchandise they'll pay
cash for--gold or silver--is opium, nothing
else. It's very unfortunate."
  "Then it's up to traders and Parliament and
diplomats to pull their fingers out. For the last
twenty years the Royal Navy has been enforcing
illegal laws in Asia, bombarding China
ports and cities, doing all sorts of rotten
acts of war, in my opinion just to support
opium--a blot on our escutcheon!"
  Sir William sighed. His orders
from the Permanent Under Secretary had been
precise: "For Christ's sake, dear
Willie, this is the first time you'll be Minister in
charge so be careful, don't make any
precipitous decisions, unless they're necessary.
You're astonishingly lucky, the telegraph
wire has already reached Bagdad so we can get and
send messages there in an incredible seven days,
add another six-odd weeks by steamer
to Yokohama through the Persian Gulf, Indian
Ocean via Singapore and Hong Kong, our
instructions will only take an incredible two
months to arrive--not the twelve to fifteen months
ten-odd years ago. So if you need guidance, which
you will all the time if you're wise, you're about four
months off our leash, and that's the only thing that
protects your neck and our Empire.
Clear?"'
  "Yes sir."
  "Rule number one: Handle the service
Brass with velvet gloves and don't overrule
them lightly because your life and those of all
Englishmen in your area depend on them. They're
inclined to be boneheaded, which is excellent for
obviously we need lots of these sort of
fellows to go off and get killed defending our,
well, Imperial policy. Do not make
waves, Japan is unimportant but in our
sphere of influence and we've spent considerable time
and money finessing the Russians, Americans and
French out. Do not foul up our Japanese nest,
we've enough on our Imperial plate with
rebellious Indians, Afghans, Arabs,
Africans, Persians, Caribbeans, Chinese
to say nothing of the rotten Europeans,
Americans, Russians etc. My dear dear
Willie, be diplomatic and don't fuck up
or else!"
  Sir William sighed again, bottled his
temper, and repeated what he had said a dozen
times, the truth: "A lot of what you say is
correct, but unfortunately we have to be
practical, without tax revenue on tea the
whole British economy will collapse.
Let's hope in a few years our Bengal
opium fields can be torched. Meanwhile we have
to be patient."
  "Meanwhile I suggest you embargo all
opium here, all modern weapons, all modern
warships, and all slavery."
  "Of course I agree about slavery, that's
been outlawed since '33!" Sir William's
voice edged perceptibly. "The Americans have
been informed long since. As to the rest,
unfortunately that's up to London."
  The Admiral's chin jutted even further.
"Well, sir, I have certain powers in these
waters. You can take it I am instituting such an
embargo now. I've heard disquieting rumors
about Struan's ordering rifles and cannon for
sale, they've already sold these natives three
or four armed steamers and the Jappers learn too
fast for my liking. I will write formally by tomorrow's
mail to the Admiralty to ask them to insist my
orders are made permanent."
  The Minister's face mottled, he planted his
feet even more firmly into the deck. "An
admirable idea," he said icily. "I will
write by the same mail. Meanwhile you cannot make
such an order without my approval and until we
have a directive from the Foreign Office the
status quo remains the status quo!"
  Both of their aides blanched. The Admiral
looked at Sir William, of a height with him.
All officers and most men would have quailed but
Sir William just stared back. "I'll ...
I'll consider what you say, Sir William.
Now if you'll excuse me I have things to do."
He turned and stomped off for the bridge. Weakly
Marlowe began to follow. "For Christ's sake,
Marlowe, stop following me like a puppy. If
I want you I'll shout. Stay within shouting
distance!"
  "Yessir." When the man was well away
Marlowe exhaled.
  Sir William had exhaled too and he
mopped his brow and muttered, "Awfully glad
I'm not in the Navy."
  "Me too," Tyrer said, amazed by the
Minister's courage.
  Marlowe's heart was racing, hating to be
bellowed at, even by an Admiral, but he did
not forget himself. "I, er ... excuse me, sir,
but the fleet's very safe in his hands, sir, and the
expedition, and we all believe he's quite right about
selling ships, guns, cannon and opium.
Japanners are already building ships and making
small cannon, this year they sailed their first
iron steamship, the 300-ton Kanrin maru
to San Francisco, crewed and
captained entirely by them. They've mastered the
deep. That's remarkable in such a short time."
  "Yes, yes it is." Sir William
wondered briefly how the Japanese Delegation
that went with this ship had fared in Washington, and what
mischief President Lincoln would generate
against our glorious Empire. Aren't we
dependent on Confederate cotton for our
Lancashire mills that are being ruined? At the
same time aren't we increasingly dependent on
abundant Union wheat and corn and meat and other
trade? He shuddered. God damn that war! And
politicians, and Lincoln. Didn't the
man's inaugural speech in March include:
"... this country belongs to the people and whenever they shall
grow weary of their government they can exercise their
constitutional right to amend it, or revolutionary right
to dismember it or overthrow it ..."
  Inflammatory to say the least! If that idea
spread to Europe! My God! Dreadful! We
may be at war with them any day, certainly at
sea. Must have cotton.
  He was trying to collect himself, heartily
relieved that the Admiral had backed down and still
cursing himself for losing control. You've got to be
more careful, and mustn't worry about Yedo and your
stupid, arrogant decision to "go there by God
in three days in a battleship and see the
Sh@ogun by God!" as though you're Clive of
India. You're not. This is your first tour of the Far
East and you're a novitiate. Madness to put
all these men at risk over a few murders,
madness to risk a full-scale war. But is it?
  Sorry, but no.
  If the Bakufu get away with this killing, then
there will be no end and we will be forced to withdraw--
until allied battle fleets return to enforce
Imperial wills bloodily. Your decision is
correct, the manner of reaching it wrong. Yes,
but it's damned difficult with no one to talk to
--who you can trust. Thank God Daphne
arrives in a couple of months. I never thought
I'd miss her and her counsel so much. I can't
wait to see her and my boys--ten months is a
long time and I know the change from London's
stinking pea soup fogs and gloom will make her
happy and please her and it will be grand for the boys.
We could use some English ladies in the
Settlement, of the right sort. We'll go on
trips and she will make the Legation a
home.
  His eyes focused on the approaching headland.
Around it is Yedo and the cannonade. Was that
wise? he asked himself queasily. I hope so.
Then the landing and going to the Legation. You've got
to do that--and prepare for the meeting tomorrow. You're alone
in this. Henri Seratard's waiting for you to mess
up, hoping. And the Russian.
  But you're the one in charge and it's your job, and
don't forget you wanted to be "Minister"
somewhere, anywhere. Indeed I did, but I never
expected Japan! Damn the Foreign Office.
I've never been in a situation like this: all my
experience has been at the French or Russian
desk in London or at the Court of St.
Petersburg, odd postings wangled to glorious
Paris and Monaco with never a warship or
regiment in sight ...
  Marlowe was saying stiffly, "I hope you
don't mind, sir, me giving my opinion of the
Admiral's position."
  "Oh, not at all." Sir William made
an effort to put his worry aside: I will try
to avoid war, but if it is to be, it will be.
"You're quite right, Mr. Marlowe, and of course
I'm honored to have Admiral Ketterer in
charge," he said, and at once felt better.
"Our difference of opinion was over protocol.
Yes, but at the same time we should be encouraging the
Japanese to industrialize and to sail ships,
one ship or twenty's nothing to be concerned about.
We should encourage them--we're not here
to colonize, but it is we who should be training them,
Mr. Marlowe, not the Dutch or the French.
Thank you for reminding me--the more our influence here
the better." He was feeling lighter. It was rare
for him to be able to talk freely to one of the
up-and-coming captains and he found Marlowe
impressive, both here and at Kanagawa. "Do
all officers detest civilians and traders?"
  "No sir. But I don't think many of us
understand them. We have different lives, different
priorities. It's difficult for us at times."
Most of Marlowe's attention was on the Admiral
who was talking to the Captain on the bridge,
everyone nearby uneasily aware of him. The sun
broke through the overcast and all at once the day
seemed better. "To be in the Navy is, well,
it's all I ever wanted to do."
  "Your family is naval?"
  At once Marlowe said proudly, "Yes
sir," wanting to add my father's a Captain,
presently in the Home Fleet--so was his father,
he was Flag Lieutenant to Admiral Lord
Collingwood in Royal Sovereign at
Trafalgar--and my forebearers have been in the
Navy since there was one. And before that, so legend
goes, they ran privateers out of Dorset where
the family comes from--we've lived there, in the
same house, for more than four centuries. But he
said none of it, his training telling him it would sound
like boasting. He just added, "My family come from
Dorset."
  "Mine come from the north of England,
Northumberland, for generations," Sir William
said absently, his eyes on the approaching
headland, his mind on the Bakufu. "My father died
when I was young--he was a Member of Parliament,
with business interests in Sunderland and London, and
dealt in the Baltic trade and Russian
furs. My mother was Russian so I grew up
bilingual and that got me on the first rung of the
F.o. She was ..." He caught himself just in
time, astonished that he had volunteered so much.
He had been going to add that she, his mother, was born
the Countess Sveva, a cousin to the Romanovs,
that she was still alive and once had been a
lady-in-waiting to Queen Victoria. I must
really concentrate--as if my family and
background was any of their business. "Er, what
about you, Tyrer?"
  "London, sir. Father's a solicitor, like
his father." Phillip Tyrer laughed. "After I
got my degree at London University and
told him I wanted to join the Foreign Office
he almost had a fit! And when I applied
to become an interpreter in Japan he told me
I'd gone mad."
  "Perhaps he was right, you're damned lucky to be
alive and you're hardly here a week. Don't you
agree, Marlowe?"
  "Yes sir. That's true." Marlowe thought the
time apt. "Phillip. By the way, how is Mr.
Struan?"
  "Neither good nor bad was how George
Babcott put it."
  "I certainly hope he recovers," Sir
William said, a sudden ache in his bowels.
  When he had gone to Kanagawa three days
ago, Marlowe had met his cutter and
told him what he knew about Struan and Tyrer,
about losing the soldier, the suicide of the
assassin, and chasing the other one.
  "We charged after the bugger, Sir William,
Pallidar and I, but the man had just vanished.
We combed the surrounding houses but nothing. Tyrer
thinks they might be the two Tokaid@o
attackers, sir, the murderers. But he's not
sure, most of them look alike, don't they?"'
  "But if they were the two, why should they risk
going to the Legation?"'
  "The best we could come up with was perhaps to prevent
identification and to finish the job, sir."
  They had left the wharf and hurried through the
ominously deserted streets. "What about the
girl, Mr. Marlowe?"'
  "Seems to be fine, sir. Just shaken."
  "Good, thank God for that, the French Minister
is wound up as tight as a gnat's bum about the
"vile insult to honor of France and one of his
nationals who is also his ward." The sooner she's
back in Yokohama the better--oh by the way, the
Admiral asked me to tell you to return
to Yokohama at once. There's a lot to do.
We, er, we've decided to pay Yedo a formal
visit in three days, by flagship ..."
  Marlowe had felt his excitement explode.
Sea or land engagements were the only real way
to quick promotion and to the Admiral's bars he would
have at all costs. I'll make the Old Man
proud of me, and get Flag Rank long before
Charles and Percy, his two younger brothers, both
Lieutenants.
  And now on the deck of the flagship, the sun
good, the deck throbbing with the power of the engines, his
excitement welled up again. "We'll be off
Yedo before you know it, sir, your entrance will be the
biggest that's ever been, you'll get the murderers,
indemnity and anything else you want."
  Both Tyrer and Sir William had heard the
excitement, but Sir William only felt
chilled. "Yes, well, I think I'll go below
for a minute, no thank you, Mr. Marlowe, I
know the way."
  With great relief, the two young men watched him
go. Marlowe checked that the Admiral was within
sight. "What happened at Kanagawa after I
left, Phillip?"
  "It was, well, extraordinary, she was
extraordinary, if that's what you were
asking."
  "How so?"
  "About five o'clock she came down and went
straight to see Malcolm Struan and stayed with
him until dinner--that's when I saw her. She
seemed ... seemed older, no, that's not quite right
either, not older but more serious than before,
mechanical. George says she's still in some form
of shock. During dinner Sir William said
he'd take her back with him to Yokohama but she
just thanked him and refused, said she'd first have
to make sure Malcolm was all right, and neither he
nor George nor any of us could persuade her
otherwise. She hardly ate anything and went
back to his sickroom, stayed with him and even
insisted on having a cot made up there so she could
be within call if need be. In fact, for the next
two days, until yesterday when I went back
to Yokohama, she hardly left his side and we
barely spoke a dozen words to her."
  Marlowe covered a sigh. "She must love
him."
  "That's the strange part. Neither Pallidar or
I think that's the reason. It's almost as though
she's ... well disembodied is too strong a
word. It's more like she's partially in a dream and that
being with him is safe."
  "Christ! What did Sawbones say?"
  "He just shrugged and said to be patient, not
to worry, and that she was the best tonic Malcolm
Struan could have."
  "I can imagine. How is he, really?"
  "Drugged most of the time, lot of pain, lot of
vomit and loose bowels--don't know how she
stands the smell though the window's open all the
time." Fear washed over both of them at the thought of
being so wounded and so helpless. Tyrer glanced
ahead, to hide, still deeply conscious that his own
wound had not yet healed, knowing it could still rot, and that
his sleep had been nightmared with samurai and
bleeding swords and her.
  "Every time I popped by to see Malcolm--and
to be honest to see her," he continued, "she just
answered me with "yes, no or I don't
know," so after a while I gave up. She's,
she's still as attractive as ever."
  Marlowe wondered: if Struan wasn't around
was she truly out of reach? How serious a rival
could Tyrer be? Pallidar he dismissed as not in
the same league--she couldn't like that
pompous bugger.
  "My word, look!" Tyrer said.
  They were rounding the headland and they saw the vast
Bay of Yedo before them, open sea to starboard,
smoke from cooking fires of the sprawling city
shrouding it, the landscape and overlording castle.
Astonishingly the bay was almost empty of the
multitude of ferries and sampans and fishing
boats that normally abounded, with the few there
scurrying for shore.
  Tyrer was very uneasy. "Is it going to be
war?"
  After a pause, Marlowe said, "They had their
warning. Most of us think, no, not a full-scale
war, not yet, not this time. There'll be incidents
..." Then, because he liked Tyrer and admired his
courage, he opened his mind to him. "There'll be
incidents and skirmishes of various sizes, some
of our people will get killed, some will discover they are
cowards, some will become heroes, most will be
petrified from time to time, some will be decorated but of
course we will win."
  Tyrer thought about that, remembering how frightened he
had already been but how Babcott had convinced him that
the first time was the worst time, how brave Marlowe
had been rushing after the assassin, how ravishing
Angelique was--and how good it was to be alive,
young, with one foot on the ladder to "Minister."
He smiled. Its warmth lit up Marlowe as
well. "All's fair in love and war, isn't
it?" he said.

  Angelique was sitting in the window of the
sickroom at Kanagawa, staring into space, the
sun breaking through the powder-puff clouds from time
to time, her heavily perfumed handkerchief to her
nose. Behind her Struan was half awake half
asleep. In the garden soldiers patrolled
constantly. Since the attack security had been
redoubled, more troops sent from the Yokohama
encampment, with Pallidar temporarily in command.
  A tap on the door pulled her from her
reverie. "Yes?" she said, hiding the kerchief in
her hand.
  It was Lim. Beside him was a Chinese orderly
with a tray. "Food for Master. Missee
wantchee eat, heya?"
  "Put there!" she ordered, and pointed at the beside
table. She was about to ask for her tray to be brought
as usual, then changed her mind, thinking
it safe. "Tonight, tonight Missee food dining
room. Unn'erstan, heya?"
  "Unn'erstan." Lim laughed to himself, knowing that
when she thought she was alone she used the kerchief.
Ayeeyah, is her nose as small and
delicate as her other part? Smell? What's the
smell they complain of? There's no smell of death
here yet. Should I tell the tai-pan's son that
news is bad from Hong Kong? Ayeeyah,
better he finds out for himself. "Unn'erstan."
He beamed and left.
  "Ch@eri?" Automatically she offered the
chicken soup.
  "Later, thank you, darling," Malcolm
Struan said as expected, his voice very weak.
  "Try to take some," she said as usual, again
he refused.
  Back once more to her seat in the window and her
daydreams--about being safe at home in Paris
again, in the great house of her uncle Michel and
her darling Emma, the highborn English aunt
who had mothered her and brought her and her brother up
when her father had left so many years ago for Hong
Kong, all of them surrounded in luxury, Emma
planning luncheons and riding in the Bois on her
prize stallion, the envy of everyone, charming the
massed aristocracy and being fawned on in
return, then bowing so gracefully to Emperor
Louis Napoleon--Napoleon Bonaparte's
nephew--and his Empress, Eug@enie, and their
smiling recognition.
  Boxes at theatres, La Com@edie
fran@caise, choice tables at Trois
Fr@eres Proven@caux, her coming of age,
seventeen, the talk of the season, Uncle
Michel recounting his adventures at the gambling
tables and the races, whispering naughty stories about
his aristocratic friends, his mistress, the Countess
Beaufois, so beautiful and seductive and
devoted.
  All daydreams of course for he was only a
junior Deputy in the War Ministry, and
Emma, English yes but an actress from a
travelling group of Shakespearean players,
daughter of a clerk, but neither with enough money for the
outward display so necessary for Angelique in the
capital of the world, for the spectacular horse, or
two-in-hand and carriage that she needed so
desperately to break into real society, the real
upper echelon, to meet those who would
marry and not just bed and flaunt and soon to pass on
to a younger flower.
  "Please please please, Uncle Michel,
it's so important!"
  "I know, my little cabbage," he had said
sadly on her seventeenth birthday when she had
begged for a particular gelding and the riding clothes
to match. "There's nothing more I can do, there are no
more favors I can ask, I know no more arms
to twist, or other moneylenders to persuade. I
possess no State secrets to sell, or
princes to promote. There's your young brother and
our daughter to consider."
  "But please, darling Uncle."
  "I have one last idea and enough francs for a
modest passage out to join your father. A few
clothes, no more."
  Then the making of the clothes, all perfect, then
trying them on and refitting and improving and yes,
the green silk gown as well as all the others--
Uncle Michel won't mind--then the excitement
of the first railway journey to Marseille, steamer
to Alexandria in Egypt, overland to Port
Said past the first diggings of Monsieur de
Lesseps' canal at Suez that all wise
informed people believe it was just another stock
promotion, that it would never be finished, or if it
was, would partially empty the Mediterranean because
those seas were higher than the seas below. Onwards,
everything begged pleaded beguiled and from the very beginning
correctly First Class: "The difference is
really so tiny, dear dear Uncle Michel
..."
  Sweet winds and new faces, exotic
nights and good days, the beginning of the great
adventure, at the end of the rainbow a handsome, rich
husband like Malcolm now all spoiled because of a
filthy native!
  Why can't I just think about the good parts, she
asked herself in sudden anguish? Why is it good
thoughts dribble into the bad and then into the awful and then
I start thinking about what truly happened and begin
to cry.
  Don't, she ordered herself, forcing away the
tears. Behave. Be strong!
  You decided before you left your room: nothing
happened, you will act as normally until your next
period arrives. When it begins--it will begin--
then you are safe.
  But if, if it doesn't?
  You won't think about that. Your future will not
be torn asunder, that wouldn't be fair. You will pray
and you will stay close to Malcolm, and pray for him
too, and act the Florence Nightingale, and then
perhaps you will marry him.
  She glanced at him over the handkerchief. To her
surprise he was watching her.
  "Is the smell still so awful?" he asked
sadly.
  "No, ch@eri," she said, pleased the lie
sounded more sincere each time and required less
effort. "Some soup, yes?"
  Wearily he nodded, knowing that he must have some
nourishment but whatever he consumed would inevitably
be retched out of him and tear the stitches, within and
without, and the pain that followed would unman him again,
much as he tried to contain it. "Dew neh loh
moh," he muttered. The curse was
Cantonese, his first language.
  She held the cup and he drank and she wiped
his chin, and drank a little more. Half of him wanted
to order her away until he was up and about again, the
other half terrified she would leave and never
return. "Sorry about all this--I love your
being here."
  For a reply she just touched his forehead gently,
wanting to leave, needing fresh air, not trusting
herself to speak. The less you speak the better, she
had decided. Then you will not be trapped.
  She watched herself minister to him and settle him
and all the while let her mind drift to ordinary
happenings, to Hong Kong or to Paris, mostly
Paris. Never would she allow herself to dwell on that
night's wake-sleep dream. Never during the
day, too dangerous. Only at night when the
door was safely barred and she was alone and safe
in bed could she release the dam and permit her mind
to voyage where it would ...
  A knock. "Yes?" Babcott strode in.
She flushed under his gaze. Why is it I think
he can always read my thoughts.
  "Just wanted to see how both my patients are
doing," he said jovially. "Well, Mr.
Struan, how are you?"
  "About the same, thank you."
  Dr. Babcott's sharp eyes noticed that
half the soup had gone but there was no vomit yet
to clear up. Good. He held Struan's wrist.
Pulse rate jumpy but better than before.
Forehead still clammy, still a temperature
but that's also lower than yesterday. Dare I hope
he will actually recover? His mouth was saying how
improved the patient was, that it must be the
ministrations of the lady, nothing to do with him, the
usual. Yes, but so little else to say, so much up
to God, if there's a God. Why do I always
add that? If.
  "If you continue to improve I think that we should
move you back to Yokohama. Perhaps tomorrow."
  "That's not wise," she said at once, frightened
she would lose her haven, her voice harsher than
she had wanted.
  "Sorry but it is," Babcott said kindly,
wanting at once to calm her, admiring her
fortitude and concern over Struan. "I wouldn't
advise it if there was a risk but it would be wise,
really. Mr. Struan would have much more comfort, more
help."
  "Mon Dieu, what else can I do? He
mustn't leave, not yet, not yet."
  "Listen, darling," Struan said, trying to sound
strong. "If he thinks I can move back, that
would be good, really. It would free you and make it
easier."
  "But I don't want to be free, I want
us to stay here, exactly as it is now without ...
without any fuss." She felt her heart pumping
and she knew she was sounding hysterical but she had not
planned for a move. Stupid, you're stupid. Of
course there would have to be a move. Think! What can
you do to prevent it?
  But there was no need to prevent anything. Struan
was saying that she should not be concerned, it would be better
to be back in the Settlement, she would be safer and
he would be happier and there were dozens of servants
and suites of rooms in the Struan Building, that
if she wished she could have the suite next to his and
she could stay or leave, just as she wished, with
constant access by day or by night. "Please
don't worry, I want you to be content too,"
he assured her. "You'll be more comfortable, I
promise, and when I'm better I'll ..."
  A spasm took him and used him.
  After Babcott had cleaned up and Struan was
once more drugged asleep, he said quietly,
"It really would be better for him there. I've more
help, more materials, it's almost impossible
to keep everything clean here. He needs ...
sorry but he needs stronger aid. You do more than
you can imagine for him, but certain
functions his Chinese servants can do better for
him. Sorry to be blunt."
  "You don't have to apologize, Doctor.
You're right and I understand." Her mind had been
racing. The suite next to Malcolm's will be
ideal, and servants and fresh clothes. I'll
find a seamstress and have beautiful dresses
made, and be correctly chaperoned and in command--of
him and of my future. "I only want what's
best for him," she said, then added quietly, needing
to know, "How long will he be like this?"
  "Confined to bed and fairly helpless?"
  "Yes, please tell me the truth.
Please."
  "I don't know. At least two or three
weeks, perhaps more, and he won't be very mobile for a
month or two after that." He glanced at the inert
man a moment. "I'd prefer you didn't say
anything to him. It would worry him
unnecessarily."
  She nodded to herself, content and at ease now,
everything in place. "Don't worry, I won't
say a word. I pray he'll get strong quickly
and promise to help all I can."
  As Dr. Babcott left her he was thinking
over and over, My God, what a wonderful
woman! If Struan lives or dies, he's
a lucky man to be loved so much.

                  

  The 21-gun salute from each of the six
warships, anchored off Yedo, that had accompanied
the flagship echoed and re-echoed, all personnel
in the fleet excited and proud of their power and that the
time for restitution had come.
  "Thus far and no further, Sir William,"
Phillip Tyrer exulted, standing beside him at the
gunnel, the smell of cordite heady. The city
was vast. Silent. The castle dominant.
  "We'll see."
  On the bridge of the flagship the Admiral
said quietly to the General, "This should convince you that
our Wee Willie's just a little popinjay with
delusions of grandeur. Royal salute be
damned. We'd better watch our backsides."
  "You're right, by Jove! Yes. I'll add it
to my monthly report to inform the War Office."
  On the deck of the French flagship, Henri
Seratard was puffing his pipe and laughing
with the Russian Minister. "Mon Dieu, my
dear Count, this is a happy day! The honor of
France will be vindicated by normal English
arrogance. Sir William is bound to fail.
Perfidious Albion is more perfidious than
ever."
  "Yes. Disgusting that it's their fleet and not
ours."
  "But soon your fleets and ours will have replaced
them."
  "Yes. Then we're secretly agreed? When
the English leave, we take Japan's North
Island, plus Sakhalin, the Kuriles and all
islands linking it to Russian Alaska--France
the rest."
  "Agreed. As soon as Paris gets my
memorandum it will surely be ratified at the
highest level, secretly." He smiled.
"When a vacuum exists, it is our
diplomatic duty to fill it ..."

  With the cannonade a great fear exploded over
Yedo. All remaining skeptics joined the
masses clogging every road and bridge and lane,
fleeing with the few possessions they could carry--of
course no wheels anywhere--everyone expecting that
bursting shells and rockets they had heard of but
had never witnessed would any moment rain fire and
their city would burn, burn, burn and them with it.
  "Death to gai-jin," was on every lip.
  "Hurry ... Out of the way ... Hurry!" people
were shouting, here and there in panic, a few crushed
or shoved off bridges or into houses, most
stoically plodding onwards--but always away from the
sea. "Death to gai-jin!" they said as they fled.
  The exodus had begun this morning, the moment the
fleet had weighed anchor in Yokohama harbor
though, three days earlier the more prudent merchants
had quietly hired the best porters and removed
themselves, their families and valuables when rumors
of the unfortunate incident--and the resulting
foreign uproar and demands--had flashed through the
city.
  Only the samurai in the castle and those manning
the outer defenses and strong points were still in
place. And, as always and everywhere, the carrion of the
streets, animal and human, who slunk and
sniffed around the lockless houses, seeking what could
be stolen and later sold. Very little was stolen.
Looting was considered a particularly
hideous crime and, from time immemorial,
perpetrators would be pursued relentlessly
until caught and then crucified. Any form of
stealing was punished in the same fashion.
  Within the castle keep, Sh@ogun Nobusada
and Princess Yazu were cowering behind a flimsy
screen, their arms around each another, their guards,
maids and court ready for instant departure,
only awaiting the Guardian's permission
to leave. Everywhere in the castle proper, men were
preparing defenses in depth, others harnessing
horses and packing the most valuable possessions
of the Elders for evacuation, with their owners, the moment
shelling began or word was brought to the Council that
enemy troops were disembarking.
  In the Council chamber at the hurriedly
convened meeting of the Elders, Yoshi was saying,
"I repeat, I don't believe they'll
attack us in force, or sh--"
  "And I see no reason to wait. To go is
prudent, they will start shelling any moment,"
Anjo said. "The first cannonade was their warning."
  "I don't think so, I think it was just an
arrogant announcement of their presence. There were
no shells in the city. The fleet won't shell
us and I repeat I believe the meeting tomorrow will
take place as planned. At the meet--"
  "How can you be so blind? If our positions were
reversed and you commanded that fleet and possessed that
overwhelming power, would you hesitate for a moment?"
Anjo was stark with rage. "Well, would you?"
  "No, of course not! But they are not us and we not
them and that's the way to control them."
  "You are beyond understanding!" In exasperation Anjo
turned to the other three Councillors. "The
Sh@ogun must be taken to a safe place, we must
go too to carry on the government. That's all I
propose, a temporary absence. Except for
our personal retainers, all other samurai will
stay, the Bakufu stays." Once more he glared
at Yoshi. "You stay if you wish. Now we will
vote: the temporary absence is approved!"
  "Wait! If you do that the Sh@ogunate will
lose face forever, we'll never be able to control the
daimyos and their opposition--or the Bakufu.
Never!"
  "We are just being prudent! The Bakufu
remains in place. So do all warriors. As
Chief Councillor it's my right to call for a
vote, so vote! I vote Yes!"
  "I say No!" Yoshi said.
  "I agree with Yoshi-san," Utani said.
He was a short, thin man with kind eyes and spare
visage. "I agree if we leave we lose
face forever."
  Yoshi smiled back, liking him--daimyos
of the Watasa fief were ancient allies since
before Sekigahara. He looked at the other two,
both senior members of Toranaga clans.
Neither met his eyes. "Adachi-sama?"
  Finally, Adachi, daimyo of Mito, a
rotund little man, said nervously, "I agree with
Anjo-sama that we should leave, and the Sh@ogun of
course. But I also agree with you that then we may
lose even though we gain. Respectfully I
vote No!"
  The last Elder, Toyama, was in his middle
fifties, grey-haired with heavy dewlaps and
blind in one eye from a hunting accident--an old
man as ages went in Japan. He was daimyo
of Kii, father of the young Sh@ogun. "It bothers me
not at all if we live or die, nor the death
of my son, this Sh@ogun--there will always be another.
But it bothers me very much to retreat just because gai-jin
have anchored off our shore. I vote against
retreat and for attack, I vote we go to the coast
and if the jackals land we kill them all, their
ships, cannon, rifles notwithstanding!"
  "We don't have enough troops here," Anjo said,
sick of the old man and his militancy that had never
been proved. "How many times do I have to say it:
we do not have enough troops to hold the castle and stop
them landing in strength. How many times do I have
to repeat our spies say they have two thousand
soldiers with rifles in the ships and at the
Settlement, and ten times that number in Hong
Kong an--"
  Yoshi interrupted angrily, "We would have had
more than enough samurai and their daimyos here if you
hadn't cancelled sankin-kotai!"
  "That was at the Emperor's request, given in
writing and presented by a Prince of his Court.
We had no option but to obey. You would also have
obeyed."
  "Yes--if I'd taken delivery of the
document! But I would never have accepted it, I would
have been away, or would have delayed the Prince,
any one of a hundred ploys, or bartered with
Sanjiro who instigated the "requests," or
told one of our Court supporters
to petition the Emperor to withdraw the requests,"
Yoshi's voice snapped. "Any petition from the
Sh@ogunate must be approved--that's historic
law. We still control the Court's stipend! You
betrayed our heritage."
  "You call me a traitor?" To everyone's
shock Anjo's hand tightened on his sword
hilt.
  "I say you allowed Sanjiro to puppet you,"
Yoshi replied without moving, calm on the
surface of his skin, hoping that Anjo would make
the first move and then he could kill him and have done with
his stupidity forever. "There is no precedent to go
against the Legacy. It was a betrayal."
  "All daimyos other than immediate Toranaga
families wanted it! The consensus of Bakufu
agreed, the roju agreed, better to agree than
to force all daimyos into the camp of the outside
lords to challenge us at once as Sanjiro, the
Tosas and Choshus would have done. We would have been
totally isolated. Isn't that true?" he said
to the others. "Well, isn't it?"
  Utani said quietly, "It's certainly
true I agreed--but now I think it was a
mistake."
  "The mistake we made was not to intercept
Sanjiro and kill him," Toyama said.
  "He was protected by Imperial Mandate,"
Anjo said.
  His old man's lips curled from his yellow
teeth. "So?"
  "All Satsuma would have risen up against us,
rightly, the Tosa and Choshu would join in and we'd
have a general civil war we cannot win. Vote!
Yes or no?"
  "I vote for attack, only attack," the
old man said stubbornly, "today on any landing,
tomorrow at Yokohama."
  From far off came the skirl of bagpipes.

  Four more cutters were heading for the wharf, three
packed with Highland Infantry to join others already
formed up there, drums beating and bagpipes wailing
impatiently. Kilts, busbies, scarlet
tunics, rifles. Sir William, Tyrer,
Lun and three of his staff were in the last boat.
  As they came ashore, the captain in charge of the
detachment saluted. "Everything's ready sir.
We've patrols guarding this warf and the surrounding
areas. Marines will take over from us within the
hour."
  "Good. Then let's proceed to the Legation."
  Sir William and his party got into the
carriage that had been ferried and manhandled ashore
with so much effort. Twenty sailors picked up the
traces. The captain gave the order to advance
and the cortege marched off, flags waving,
soldiers surrounding them, a resplendent,
six-feet-eight drum major to the fore, Chinese
coolies from Yokohama nervously dragging
baggage carts in the rear.
  The narrow streets between the low, one-story shops
and buildings were eerily empty. So was the
inevitable guard post at the first wooden bridge
over a festering canal. And the next. A dog
charged out of an alley, barking and snarling, then
picked itself up and scuttled away howling after a
kick lifted it into the air and sent it sprawling
ten yards. More empty streets and bridges,
yet their way to the Legation was tortuous because of the
carriage and because all streets were only for foot
traffic. Again the carriage stuck.
  "Perhaps we should walk, sir?" Tyrer asked.
  "No, by God, I arrive by carriage!"
Sir William was furious with himself. He had
forgotten the narrowness of the streets. At
Yokohama he had privately decided on the
carriage just because wheels were forbidden, to further ram
home his displeasure to the Bakufu. He called
out, "Captain, if you have to knock down a few
houses, so be it."
  But that did not become necessary. The sailors,
used to handling cannon in tight places below
decks, good-naturedly shoved and pushed and cursed
and half carried the carriage around the
bottlenecks.
  The Legation was on a slight rise in the
suburb of Gotenyama, beside a Buddhist
temple. It was a two-story, still uncompleted
structure of British style and design inside
a high fence and gates. Within three months of the
Treaty's signing, work had begun.
  Building had been agonizingly slow, partially
because of British insistence on using their plans and
their normal building materials such as glass for
windows and bricks for bearing walls--that had to be
brought from London, Hong Kong or Shanghai
--constructing foundations and the like which Japanese
houses did not normally possess, being of wood,
deliberately light and easy to erect
and repair because of earthquakes and raised off the
ground. Most of the delays, however, were due
to Bakufu reluctance to have any foreign edifices
whatsoever outside Yokohama.
  Even though not fully finished, the Legation was
occupied and the British flag raised daily on
the dominant flagpole which further incensed the
Bakufu and local citizens. Last year
occupation was temporarily abandoned by Sir
William's predecessor when ronin, at
night, killed two guards outside his bedroom
door to British fury and Japanese rejoicing.
  "Oh so sorry ..." the Bakufu said.
  But the site, leased in perpetuity by the
Bakufu--mistakenly, it had been claimed ever
since--had been wisely chosen. The view from the
forecourt was the best in the neighborhood and they could
see the fleet drawn up in battle order,
safely offshore, safely at anchor.
  The cortege arrived in martial style to take
possession again. Sir William had decided
to spend the night in the Legation to prepare for tomorrow's
meeting and he bustled about, stopped as the Captain
saluted. "Yes?"
  "Raise the flag, sir? Secure the
Legation?"
  "At once. Keep to the plan, lots of
noise, drums, pipes and so on. Pipe the
retreat at sunset, and have the band march up and
down."
  "Yes sir." The Captain walked over to the
flagstaff. Ceremoniously, to the heady skirl
of more pipes and drums, once more the Union
Jack broke out at the masthead. Immediately,
by previous agreement, there was an acknowledging
broadside from the flagship. Sir William
raised his hat and led three resounding cheers for the
Queen. "Good, that's better. Lun!"
  "Heya Mass'er?"
  "Wait a minute, you're not Lun!"
  "I Lun Two, Mass'r, Lun One come
'night, chop chop."
  "All right, Lun Two. Dinner sunset, you
make every Mass'er shipshape never mind."
  Lun Two nodded sourly, hating to be in such
an isolated, indefensible place, surrounded by a
thousand hidden, hostile eyes that everyone carelessly
dismissed, though nearly all must sense. I'll
never understand barbarians, he thought.
                                  
  That night Phillip Tyrer could not sleep.
He lay on one of the straw mattresses atop
a ragged carpet on the floor, wearily changing
his position every few minutes, his mind
unpleasantly crossed with thoughts of London and
Angelique, the attack and the meeting tomorrow, the
ache in his arm, and Sir William who had been
irritable all day. It was cold with a slight
promise of winter on the air, the room small.
Windows with glass panes overlooked the
spacious, well-planted back gardens. The
other mattress bed was for the Captain but he was still
making his rounds.
  Apart from sounds of dogs foraging, a few
tomcats, the city was silent. Occasionally he could
hear distant ships' bells of the fleet sounding the
hours and the throaty laughter of their soldiers and
he felt reassured. Those men are superb, he
thought. We're safe here.
  At length he got up, yawned and padded over
to the window, opened it to lean on the sill.
Outside it was black, the cloud cover thick.
No shadows but he saw many Highlanders
patrolling with oil lamps. Beyond the fence to one
side was the vague shape of the Buddhist temple.
At sunset after the bagpipes had beat the
retreat and the Union Jack ritually pulled
down for the night, monks had barred their heavy
gate, sounded their bell, then filled the night with
their strange chanting: "Ommm mahnee
padmee hummmmm ..." over and over again.
Tyrer had been calmed by it, unlike many of the
others who shouted catcalls, telling them rudely
to shut up.
  He lit a candle that was beside the bed. His fob
watch showed it was 2:30. Yawning again, he
rearranged the blanket, propped himself up with the
rough pillow and opened his small attach`e case,
his initials embossed on it--a parting gift from his
mother--and took out his notebook. Covering the
column of Japanese words and phrases he had
written out phonetically, he muttered the
English equivalents, then the next page, and the
next. Then the same with the English and said aloud the
Japanese. It pleased him every one was right.
  "They're so few, I don't know if I'm
pronouncing them correctly, I've so little time,
and I haven't even begun to learn the writing,"
he muttered.
  At Kanagawa he had asked
Babcott where he could get the best teacher.
"Why not ask the padre?"' Babcott had said.
  He had, yesterday. "Certainly, my boy.
But can't this week, how about next month? Care for
another sherry?"'
  My God, can they drink here! They're
sozzled most of the time and certainly by lunch. The
padre's useless, and smells to high heaven. But
what a stroke of luck about Andr`e Poncin!
  Yesterday afternoon he had accidentally met the
Frenchman in one of the Japanese village
shops that serviced their needs. These lined the
village main street that was behind High Street,
away from the sea and adjoined Drunk Town.
All the shops appeared to be the same, selling the
same kinds of local merchandise from food to fishing
tackle, from cheap swords to curios. He was
searching through a rack of Japanese books--the
paper of very high quality, many beautifully
printed and illustrated from woodblocks--trying
to make himself understood to the beaming proprietor.
  "Pardon, Monsieur," the stranger
had said, "but you have to name the type of book you
want." He was in his thirties, clean-shaven,
with brown eyes and brown, wavy hair, a fine
Gallic nose and well dressed. "You say:
Watashi hoshii hon, Ing'erish
Nihongo, dozo--I would like a book that has
English and Japanese." He smiled. "Of
course there aren't any though this fellow will tell you
with abject sincerity, Ah so desu ka,
gomen nasai, etc.--Ah so sorry I have
none today but if you come back tomorrow ... Of course
he's not telling the truth, only telling you what
he thinks you want to know, a fundamental
Japanese habit. I'm afraid Japanese
are not generous with the truth, even amongst themselves."
  "But, Monsieur, may I ask, then how
did you learn Japanese--obviously you're
fluent."
  The man laughed pleasantly. "You are too
kind. Me, I'm not, though I try." An
amused shrug. "Patience. And because some of our
Holy Fathers speak it."
  Philip Tyrer frowned. "I'm afraid
I'm not Catholic, I'm Church of England,
and, er, and an apprentice interpreter at the
British Legation. My name is Phillip
Tyrer and I've just arrived and a bit out of my
depth."
  "Ah, of course, the young Englishman of the
Tokaid@o. Please excuse me, I should have
recognized you, we were all horrified to hear about
it. May I present myself, Andr`e Poncin,
late of Paris, I'm a trader."
  "Je suis enchant`e de vous
voir," Tyrer said, speaking French easily
and well though with a slight English accent--throughout
the world, outside of Britain, French was the
language of diplomacy, and lingua franca of
most Europeans, therefore essential for a Foreign
Office posting--as well as for anyone considering
themselves well educated. In French he added,
"Do you think the Fathers would consider teaching me, or
allowing me to join their classes?"'
  "I don't believe any actually give
classes. I could ask. Are you going with the fleet
tomorrow?"'
  "Yes, indeed."
  "So am I, with Monsieur Seratard, our
Minister. You were at the Legation in Paris before
here?"'
  "Unfortunately no, I've only been
to Paris for two weeks, Monsieur, on
holiday--this is my first posting."
  "Oh, but your French is very good,
Monsieur."
  "Afraid it's not, not really," Tyrer said
in English again. "I presume you are an
interpreter too?"'
  "Oh no, just a businessman, but I try
help Monsieur Seratard sometimes when his
official Dutch-speaking interpreter is sick--
I speak Dutch. So you wish to learn
Japanese, as quickly as possible, eh?"'
Poncin went over to the rack and selected a
book. "Have you seen one of these yet? It's
Hiroshige's Fifty-Three Stages on the
Tokaid@o Road. Don't forget the beginning
of the book is at the end for us, their writing right
to left. The pictures show the way stations all the
way to Ky@oto." He thumbed through them.
"Here's Kanagawa, and here Hodogaya."
  The four-color woodblock prints were
exquisite, better than anything Tyrer had ever
seen, the detail extraordinary. "They're
marvelous."
  "Yes. He died four years ago, pity,
because he was a marvel. Some of their artists are
extraordinary, Hokusai,
Masanobu, Utamaro and a dozen others."
Andr`e laughed and pulled out another book.
"Here, these are a must, a primer for Japanese
humor and calligraphy as they call their
writing."
  Phillip Tyrer's mouth dropped open. The
pornography was decorous and completely
explicit, page after page, with beautifully
gowned men and women, their naked parts monstrously
exaggerated and drawn in majestic, hairy
detail as they joined vigorously and
inventively. "Oh my God!"
  Poncin laughed outright. "Ah, then I have
given you a new pleasure. As erotica they're
unique, I have a collection I'd be glad
to show you. They're called shunga-every the others
ukiyo-every--pictures from the Willow World or
Floating World. Have you visited one of the
bordellos yet?"'
  "I ... I, no ... no I, I, er,
haven't."
  "Oh, in that case, may I be a guide?"'
  Now in the night, Tyrer remembered their
conversation and how secretly embarrassed he had
been. He had tried to pretend he was equally a
man of the world, but at the same time kept hearing his
father's grave and constant advice: "Listen,
Phillip, Frenchmen are all vile and totally
untrustworthy, Parisians the dregs of France
and Paris without doubt the sin city of the civilized
world--licentious, vulgar, and French!"
  Poor Papa, he thought, he's so wrong about
so many things, but then he lived in Napoleonic
times and survived the bloodbath of Waterloo.
However great the victory, it must have been terrible
for a ten-year-old drummer boy, no wonder he
will never forgive or could forget or accept the new
Era. Never mind, Papa has his life and as much
as I love him, and admire him for what he
did, I have to make my own way. France is
almost an ally now--it's not wrong to listen and
learn.
  He flushed, remembering how he had hung on
Andr`e's words--secretly ashamed of his avid
fascination.
  The Frenchman explained that here bordellos were
places of great beauty, the best of them, and their
courtesans, the Ladies of the Floating World,
or Willow World as they were called, easily the
best he had ever experienced. "There are
degrees, of course, and streetwalkers in most
towns. But here we have our own Pleasure
Quarter, called Yoshiwara. It's over the
bridge outside the fence." Again the pleasant
laugh, "We call it the Bridge
to Paradise. Oh yes and you should know that ... oh
excuse me, I interrupt your shopping."
  "Oh but no, not at all," he had said at
once, aghast that this flow of information and rare
opportunity would cease, and added in his most
flowery and honeyed French, "I would consider it
an honor if you would care to continue, really, it
is so important to learn as much as one can and
I'm afraid the people I associate with, and talk
to, are ... regretfully, not Parisian,
mostly stodgy and without French sophistication.
To return your kindness perhaps I may offer you some
tea or champagne at the English Tea
House, or perhaps a drink at the Yokohama
Hotel--sorry, but I'm not a member of the
Club yet."
  "You are too kind, yes I would like that."
  Thankfully he beckoned the shopkeeper, with
Poncin's help paid for the book, astonished it was
so inexpensive. They went into the street. "You were
saying about the Willow World?"'
  "There's nothing sordid about it as in most of
our brothels and almost all those elsewhere in the world.
Here, as in Paris, but more so, the act of sex is
an art form, as delicate and special as great
cuisine, to be considered and practiced and savored
and thought of as such, with no ... please excuse
me, no misguided Anglo-Saxon
"guilt.""
  Instinctively, Tyrer bridled. For a moment
was tempted to correct him and say that there was a
vast difference between guilt, and a healthy attitude
towards morality and all good Victorian
values. And to add that, regretfully the French
had never possessed any distinction with their leaning
towards loose living that seduced even such august
nobles as the Prince of Wales who openly
considered Paris home ("a source of grave
concern in the highest English circles," the
Times glowered, "French vulgarity knows no
end, their wretched display of wealth and outrageous
innovative dances, like the cancan where, it is
reliably reported, the dancers deliberately
do not and are even required not to wear any under
garments whatsoever").
  But he said none of it, knowing he would only be
parroting more of his father's words. Poor Papa, he
thought again, concentrating on Poncin as they strolled
the High Street, the sun pleasing and the air
bracing, with the promise of a fine day tomorrow.
  "But here in Nippon, Monsieur
Tyrer," the Frenchman continued happily,
"there are marvelous rules and regulations, both
for clients and the girls. For instance, they're not
all on show at one time, except in the very
low-class places, and even then you can't just go in
and say I want that one."
  "You can't?"'
  "Oh no, she always has the right to refuse you
without any loss of face on her part. There are
special protocols--I can explain in
detail later if you wish--but each House is
run by a madam, called mama-san, the san
being a suffix meaning mistress, madam or
mister, who prides herself on the elegance of her
surroundings and her Ladies. They vary, of
course, in price and excellence. In the best, the
mama-san vets you, that's the right word, she
considers if you are worthy to grace her House and
all it contains, in substance whether or not you can
pay the bill. Here a good customer can have a great
deal of credit, Monsieur Tyrer, but woe
betide you if you do not pay or are late once the
bill is discreetly presented. Every House in
all Japan will then refuse you every kind of
entrance."
  Tyrer had guffawed nervously at the pun.
  "How word passes I don't know but it
does, from here to Nagasaki. So, Monsieur,
in certain ways this is paradise. A man can
fornicate for a year on credit, if he so
desires." Poncin's voice changed
imperceptibly. "But the wise man buys a
lady's contract and reserves her for his private
pleasure. They are really so, so charming and so
inexpensive when you consider the enormous profit
we make on the money exchange."
  "You, well, that's what you advise?"'
  "Yes, yes I do."
  They had had tea. Then champagne at the
Club where Andr`e was clearly a well-known and
popular member. Before they parted, Andr`e had said,
"The Willow World deserves care and attention.
I would be honored to be one of your guides."
  He had thanked him, knowing he would
never take advantage of the offer. I mean, what
about Angelique? What about, what about catching
one of the vile diseases, gonorrhea, or the
French disease that the French call the English
disease and the doctors call syphilis that
George Babcott mentioned pointedly abounds,
under any name, in any Asian or Middle
Eastern Treaty Ports, "... or any
port for that matter, Phillip. I see lots
of cases here amongst the Japanese, not all
European related. If you're that way inclined,
wear a sheath, they're not safe, not much good yet.
Best you don't, if you know what I mean."
  Phillip Tyrer shuddered. He had had only
one experience. Two years ago he had become
boisterously drunk with some fellow students after
their finals, in the Star and Garter public house
on Pont Street. "Now's the time,
Phillip, old boy. It's all fixed,
she'll do it for tuppence, won't you,
Flossy?"' She was a bar girl, a bawdy of
about fourteen, and the tumble had taken place
hurriedly, sweatily, in a smelly upstairs
cubbyhole--a penny for her and a penny for the
publican. For months afterwards he was petrified
he was poxed.
  "We have more than fifty Teahouses, as
they're called, or Inns, to choose from in our
Yoshiwara, all licensed and controlled by the
authorities, more going up every day. But take
care, go nowhere in Drunk Town." This was the
unwholesome part of the Settlement, where the
low-class bars and rooming houses clustered around
the only European brothel: "It's for
soldiers and sailors and seamen, and for the riffraff,
ne'er do wells, remittance men, gamblers and
adventurers who congregate there, on sufferance.
Every port acquires them because we have no police
yet, no immigration laws. Perhaps Drunk
Town's a safety valve but unwise to visit
after dark. If you value your pocket book and
your privates don't take them out there.
Musuko-san deserves better."
  "What?"'
  "Ah, a very important word. Musuko
means son, or my son. Musuko-san
literally means Honorable Son, or Mr. My
Son, but in the patois, cock or My
Honorable Cock, pure and simple. Girls
are called musume. Actually the word
means daughter, or my daughter, but in the
Willow World, vagina. You say to your girl,
"Konbanwa, musume-san." Good evening,
ch@erie. But if you say it with the twinkle she
knows you mean, How is it? How is your Golden
Gully, as Chinese sometimes call man's
passage to paradise--they are so wise, the
Chinese, because the sides certainly are lined with
gold, the whole nourished by gold and only opened
with gold, one way or another ..."
  Tyrer lay back, his notebook forgotten,
brain churning. Almost before he realized it, the little
book of ukiyo-every that he had hidden in his
briefcase was open and he was studying the
pictures. Abruptly he replaced it.
  No future in looking at dirty
pictures, he thought consumed with disgust. The candle
was guttering now. He blew out the flame, then
lay back, the familiar ache in his loins.
  What a lucky man Andr`e is. Obviously
he has a mistress. That must be marvelous, if
even half of what he says is true.
  I wonder if I could get one too? Could I
buy a contract? Andr`e said many here do, and rent
private little houses in the Yoshiwara that can be
secret and discreet if you wish: "It's
rumored all the Ministers possess one, Sir
William certainly goes there at least once a
week--he thinks no one knows but everyone spies
him and laughs--but not the Dutchman who's
impotent, according to rumor, and the Russian who
openly prefers to sample different houses.
..."
  Should I risk it, if I could afford it? After
all, Andr`e gave me a very special reason:
"To learn Japanese quickly, Monsieur,
acquire a sleeping dictionary--it's the only
way."
  But his last thought before sleep overwhelmed him
was: I wonder why Andr`e was so kind to me, so
voluble. Rare for a Frenchman to be so open with an
Englishman. Very rare. And strange that he never
mentioned Angelique once ...

  It was just before dawn. Ori and Hiraga, again in
all-encompassing ninja clothes, came out of their
hiding place in the temple grounds overlooking the
Legation and ran silently down the hill, across the
wooden bridge and into an alley, down it and
into another. Hiraga led. A dog saw
them, growled, moved into their path and died. The
deft short arc of Hiraga's sword was
instantaneous and he hurried onwards with the blade
unsheathed, hardly missing a step, ever deeper
into the city. Ori followed carefully. Today his
wound had begun to fester.
  In the lee of a hut on a protected corner,
Hiraga stopped. "It's safe here, Ori!"
he whispered.
  Hastily both men slipped out of their ninja
clothes and stuffed them into the soft bag Hiraga
carried slung on his back, replacing them with
nondescript kimonos. With great care
Hiraga cleansed his sword using a piece of
silk cloth, carried for that purpose by all
swordsmen to protect their blades, then sheathed
it. "Ready?"
  "Yes."
  Again he led onwards into the maze,
surefooted, staying under cover where he could,
hesitating at every open space until he was
sure they were safe, seeing no one, meeting no
one, then pressed on, heading for their safe house.
  They had been watching the Legation since early
morning, the bonzes--the Buddhist priests--
pretending not to notice them, once they were sure the
two men were not thieves and Hiraga had
identified himself and their purpose: to spy on the
gai-jin. All bonzes were fanatically
xenophobic and anti-gai-jin, to them synonymous
with Jesuit, still their most hated and feared enemy.
"Ah, you are shishi, then you are both
welcome," the old monk had said. "We have
never forgotten Jesuits ruined us, or that the
Toranaga Sh@oguns are our scourge."
  From the middle of the fifteenth century to the early
sixteenth, Portuguese alone knew the way
to Japan. Papal edicts had also given them
exclusivity to the islands, and Portuguese
Jesuits the sole right to proselytize. Within a
few years they had converted so many daimyos
to Catholicism, therefore naturally their retainers,
that Dictator Goroda had used them as an
excuse to massacre thousands of Buddhist monks
at that time militant, dominant in the land and
opposed to him.
  The tair@o, Nakamura, who inherited his
power, expanded it immensely, and played off
bonze against Jesuit with honey, persecution,
suffering and killing. Then came
Toranaga.
  Toranaga, tolerant of all religions,
though not of foreign influence, observed that all
converted daimyos had initially fought against him at
Sekigahara. Three years later, he became
Sh@ogun and two years after that he resigned in
favor of his son, Sudara, but kept actual
power--an old established Japanese custom.
  During his lifetime he leashed Jesuits and
Buddhists severely, and eliminated or
neutralized the Catholic daimyos. His son,
Sh@ogun Sudara, tightened the curbs and his
son, Sh@ogun Hironaga, finished the plan
laid down so carefully in the Legacy where he
formally outlawed Christianity from Japan on pain
of death. In 1638, Sh@ogun Hironaga
destroyed the last Christian bastion at
Shimabara, near Nagasaki, where a few thousand
ronin, thirty thousand peasants and their families
were in rebellion against him. Those who refused
to recant were crucified or put to the sword
immediately as common criminals. All but a handful
refused. Then he turned his attention to the
Buddhists. Within days he was pleased to accept the
gift of all their lands, and so fettered them.
  "You are welcome, Hiraga-san,
Ori-san," the old monk had said again. "We
are for the shishi, for sonno-joi and against the
Sh@ogunate. You are free to come or go as you
please. If you want help, tell us."
  "Then keep a tally of the numbers of
soldiers, their comings and goings, what rooms are
occupied and by whom."
  The two men had waited and watched throughout the
day. At dusk they put on their ninja clothes.
Twice Hiraga moved closer to the Legation,
once he scaled the fence to experiment and
reconnoiter but quickly retreated unseen when a
patrol almost trod on him.
  "We'll never get in by night, Ori," he
whispered. "Or by day. Too many troops
now."
  "How long do you think they'll stay?"'
  Hiraga smiled. "Until we drive them
out."
  Now they were almost at their safe house, an Inn
that lay to the east of the castle. Dawn was near, the
sky lighter and cloud cover thinner than yesterday.
Ahead the street was deserted. So was the bridge.
Confident, Hiraga hurried onto it,
skidded to a stop. A Bakufu patrol of ten
men stepped out of the shadows. At once both
sides went into attack-defense positions, hands
on their sword hilts.
  "Come forward and give me your identification
papers," the senior samurai called out.
  "Who are you to challenge anyone?"
  "You see our badges," the man said
angrily, stepping onto the wooden slats of the
bridge. The remainder of his men spread out behind
him. "We are of warriors of Mito, 9th
Regiment, guardians of the Sh@ogun. Identify
yourselves."
  "We have been spying on the enemy stockade.
Let us pass."
  "You look like thieves. What's in that bag on
your back, eh? Identification!"
  Ori's shoulder was throbbing. He had seen the
telltale discoloration but had hidden it from
Hiraga, and the pain. His head ached but he knew
instantly he had nothing to lose and an admirable
death to gain.
  "Sonno-joi!" he bellowed suddenly and
hurled himself at the samurai on the bridge. The
others backed off to give them room as Ori
hacked with all his might, recovered as the blow was
deflected and again attacked, feinted and this time his
blow was true. The man was dead on his feet, then
crumpled. At once Ori darted for another
man who retreated, went for another who also
retreated. The ring of men began to close.
  "Sonno-joi!" Hiraga shouted and rushed
to Ori's side. Together they stood at bay.
  "Identify yourselves!" a young warrior said,
unimpressed. "I am Hiro Watanabe and do
not wish to kill or be killed by an unknown
warrior."
  "I am shishi from Satsuma!" Ori said
proudly, adding an alias as was their usual
custom, "Riyama Takagaki."
  "And I from Choshu, my name Shodan Moto!
Sonno-joi," Hiraga shouted and hurled himself
at Watanabe who retreated without fear, as did
the others nearby.
  "I've never heard of either of you," Watanabe
said through his teeth. "You're not shishi--you are
scum." His rush was parried. Hiraga, a master
swordsman, used his assailant's strength and
speed to catch him off balance, sidestepped and
cut under the opposing sword into the man's
unprotected side, withdrew and in one continuous
movement sliced into the man's neck,
decapitated him as he toppled to the ground, ending
once more in perfect attack position.
  The silence was profound. "Who did you study
under?" someone asked.
  "Toko Fujita was one of my Sensei,"
Hiraga said, every part of him ready for the next
killing.
  "Eeeee!" This was one of Mito's revered
sword masters who had been killed in Yedo's
earthquake of '55 when a hundred thousand also
perished.
  "They are shishi, and men of Mito do not kill
shishi, their own kind," one of the men said softly.
"Sonno-joi!" Warily, this man moved
aside a pace, not sure of the others, his sword
still ready. They looked at him, then at one
another. Opposite him another man moved.
Now there was an inviting, narrow path between them, but
all swords stayed poised.
  Hiraga readied, expecting a trick, but
Ori nodded to himself, his pain forgotten, victory
or death the same to him. Taking his time, he
cleansed his blade and sheathed it. Politely he
bowed to both the dead men and strode through the narrow
passage, looking neither right nor left nor
backwards.
  In a moment Hiraga followed. Equally
slowly. Until they turned the corner. Then they
both took to their heels and did not stop until
they were well away.

                 

  The five Bakufu representatives came
leisurely into the Legation forecourt in their
palanquins. They were an hour late and preceded
by samurai with banners bearing their official
emblems and surrounded by guards. Sir William
stood at the top of the wide steps that led to the
imposing entrance. Beside him were the French,
Russian and Prussian Ministers--their
aides, Phillip Tyrer and others of the Legation
staff to one side--and an honor guard of
Highlanders with some French soldiers Seratard had
insisted upon. Admiral Ketterer and the General
had remained aboard, in reserve.
  Ceremoniously the Japanese bowed, Sir
William and the others raised their hats.
Ritually they conducted the Japanese to the large
audience hall, trying to restrain their amusement
at their outlandish costumes: small black
lacquered hats set square on their shaven
pates and tied elaborately under their chins, the
vast shouldered overgarments, multicolored
ceremonial silk kimonos, voluminous
pantaloons, thong sandals and shoe socks
split between the toes--tabi--fans in their
belts and the inevitable two swords. "Those hats
aren't big enough to piss in," the Russian said.
  Sir William sat in the center of one line
of chairs with the Ministers, Phillip Tyrer on
one end to balance the delegation. The Bakufu
took the opposite row, interpreters on
cushions in between. After lengthy discussion they
agreed on five guards each. These men stood
behind their masters and eyed each other suspiciously.
  Following strict protocol the adversaries
introduced themselves. Toranaga Yoshi was last:
"Tomo Watanabe, junior official,
second class," he said, pretending a humbleness
he did not feel, and took the lowest position at
the end of the row, his clothes less elaborate than
those of the others who, with all guards, had been
commanded on pain of punishment to treat him as the least
important official here.
  He settled himself, feeling strange. How
ugly these enemies are, he was thinking, how
ridiculous and laughable with their tall hats,
outlandish boots and ugly, heavy black clothes
--no wonder they stink!
  Sir William said carefully and simply:
"An Englishman has been murdered
by Satsuma samurai ..."
  By five o'clock European tempers were frayed,
the Japanese still polite, smiling, outwardly
imperturbable. In a dozen different ways their
spokesman claimed that ... so sorry but they had
no jurisdiction over the Satsuma, or knowledge of the
murderers or any way to find them, but yes, it was
a regrettable affair but no, they did not know how
to obtain reparations but yes, under some circumstances
reparations might be sought but no, the Sh@ogun was not
available but yes, the Sh@ogun would be pleased
to grant an audience when he returned, but no,
not in the foreseeable future but yes, we will immediately
petition for an exact day, but no, it could not be this
month because his present whereabouts are not known for
certain, but yes, it would be as soon as
possible but no, the next meeting and all meetings
should not take place in Yedo, but yes in
Kanagawa but so sorry, not this month, perhaps
next, but no so sorry we do not have authority.
...
  Every point had to be translated from English
to Dutch to Japanese--as usual to be discussed
at length by them--then pedantically resubmitted
into Dutch into English with an inevitable homily,
and ever polite requests for explanations on the
most trivial point.
  Yoshi found the whole proceeding vastly
interesting, never having been near gai-jin en
masse or attended a meeting where unequals,
astonishingly, discussed policy and did not listen
and obey.
  Three of the other four were genuine though
unimportant Bakufu officials. All had
used false names, a normal custom when dealing
with aliens. The imposter, who secretly spoke
English, sat beside Yoshi. His name was
Misamoto. Yoshi had ordered him to remember
everything, to tell him discreetly of anything
important not translated accurately,
otherwise to keep his mouth shut. He was a felon
under sentence of death.
  When Yoshi had sent for him the day before
yesterday, Misamoto had at once prostrated
himself, shaking with fear.
  "Get up and sit over there." Yoshi
pointed with his fan to the edge of the tatami platform
on which he sat.
  Misamoto obeyed instantly. He was a
small man with slitted eyes and long, grizzled
hair and beard, the sweat running down his face,
his clothes coarse and almost rags, hands callused
and his skin the color of dark honey.
  "You will tell me the truth: your
interrogators report that you speak English?"'
  "Yes, Lord."
  "You were born in Anjiro in Izu and have been
to the land called America?"'
  "Yes, Lord."
  "How long were you there?"'
  "Almost four years, Lord."
  "Where in America?"'
  "San Francisco, Lord."
  "What is San'frensiska?"'
  "A big city, Lord."
  "Just there?"'
  "Yes, Lord."
  Yoshi studied him, needing information quickly. He
could see that the man was desperate to please but at
the same time frightened to death, of him and of the guards
who had hustled him in and shoved his head to the ground.
So he decided to try a different approach.
He dismissed the guards and got up and leaned on
the windowsill, looking at the city. "Tell
me, quickly, in your own words what happened to you."
  "I was a fisherman in the village of
Anjiro in Izu, Lord, where I was born
thirty-three years ago, Lord." Misamoto
began at once--obviously the tale told a
hundred times before. "Nine years ago I was
fishing with six others in my boat, a few ri
offshore, but we were caught in a sudden storm that
quickly became a great one and we were blown before it for
thirty days or more, eastwards, out into the great
sea, hundreds of ri, perhaps a thousand, Sire.
During this time, three of my companions were washed
overboard. Then the sea became calm but our
sails had been ripped to pieces and there was no
food and no water. The three of us fished but
caught nothing, there was no water to drink ... One
of us went mad and jumped into the sea and began
to swim to an island he thought he saw and drowned
quickly. We saw no land or ship, just water.
Many days later the other man, my friend Ishii,
died and I was alone. Then one day I thought I
had died because I saw this strange ship that went
along without sails and seemed to be on fire, but
it was just a paddle steamer, American, going from
Hong Kong to San Francisco. They rescued
me, gave me food and treated me as one of them
--I was petrified, Lord, but they shared their food
and drink and clothed me ..."
  "This American ship took you to this San
place? What happened then?"'
  Misamoto told how he had been put with a
brother of the Captain of this ship, a ship's
chandler, to learn the language and do odd jobs
until the authorities decided what to do with him.
He lived with this family for about three years,
working in their shop and in the port. One day, he was
taken before an important official called
Natow who questioned him closely, then told him he
was to be sent with the warship Missouri to Shimoda
to be an interpreter for Consul Townsend Harris
who was already in Japan negotiating a Treaty.
By this time he wore Western clothes and
had learn some Western ways.
  "I accepted happily, Sire, certain I
could be helpful here, specially helpful to the
Bakufu. On the ninth day of the eighth month of the
year 1857 by their counting, five years ago,
sire, we hove to off Shimoda in Izu, my
home village not far north, Sire. The moment
I was ashore I obtained permission to leave for a
day and set off at once, Lord, to report to the
nearest guard house to find the nearest Bakufu
official believing I would be welcome because of the knowledge
I had got ... But the barrier guards would not
..." Misamoto's face twisted with anguish.
"But they wouldn't listen to me, Sire, or understand
... they bound me and dragged me to Yedo ... that was
about five years ago, Lord, and ever since I've
been treated like a criminal, confined like one though not
in prison and I keep explaining and explaining
I'm not a spy but a loyal man of Izu and
what had happened to me ..."
  To Yoshi's disgust, tears began streaming down
the man's face. He cut the whimpering short.
"Stop it! Do you or do you not know it is forbidden,
by Law, to leave Nippon without permission?"'
  "Yes, Lord but I th--"'
  "And do you know under the same law, if broken,
whatever the reason, whoever he or she is, the
lawbreaker is forbidden to return on pain of
death?"'
  "Oh yes, Sire, yes yes I did but,
but I did not think it would include me, Sire,
I thought I'd be welcomed and valuable and I'd
been blown out to sea. It was the storm th--"'
  "A law is a law. This law is a good
law. It prevents contamination. You consider you have
been treated unfairly?"'
  "Oh no, Lord," Misamoto said
hastily, wiping his tears away, with even greater
fear, bowing his head to the tatami, "Please
excuse me, I beg your forgiveness, please
ex--"'
  "Just answer the questions. How fluent is your
English?"'
  "I ... I understand and speak some American
English, Sire."
  "Is that the same as the gai-jin here speak?"'
  "Yes Sire, yes more or les--"'
  "When you came to see the American Harris
were you shaven or unshaven?"'
  "Unshaven, Sire, I had a
trimmed beard like most sailors, Sire, and
let my hair grow like theirs and tied into a
pigtail and knotted with tar."
  "Who did you meet with this gai-jin
Harris?"'
  "Just him, Sire, just for an hour or so, and
one of his staff, I don't remember his name."
  Once more Yoshi weighed the dangers of his
plan: to go to the meeting disguised, without Council
approval, and to use this man as a spy,
to overhear the enemy secretly. Perhaps
Misamoto is a spy already, for gai-jin, he
thought grimly, as all his interrogators
believe. Certainly he's a liar, his story far
too smooth, his eyes too cunning, and he's like
a fox when off guard.
  "Very well. Later I want to know everything you
have learned, everything and ... do you read and
write?"'
  "Yes, Lord, but only a little in the
English."
  "Good. I have a use for you. If you obey
exactly and please me, I will review your
case. If you fail me, however slightly,
you-will-wish-you-had-not."
  He explained what he wanted, assigned him
teachers, and when his guards had returned
Misamoto yesterday clean-shaven, his hair
dressed like a samurai's, and wearing the clothes of
an official with two swords though these were false
and without blades, he had not recognized him.
"Good. Walk up and down."
  Misamoto obeyed and Yoshi was impressed
how quickly the man had learned an erect posture
as the teacher had shown him, not the correct,
normal servile attitude of a fisherman.
Too quickly, he thought, convinced now that
Misamoto was more, or less, than he wanted
others to see.
  "You understand clearly what you are to do?"'
  "Yes, Sire, I swear I won't fail
you, Sire."
  "I know, my guards have orders to kill you the
instant you leave my side, or become clumsy,
or ... indiscreet."

  "We'll stop for ten minutes," Sir
William said wearily. "Tell them,
Johann."
  "They ask why?" Johann
Favrod, the Swiss interpreter yawned.
"Pardon. Seems they think they've discussed
all the points etc. etc., that they'll carry
back your message etc. etc. and meet again at
Kanagawa with the reply from on high etc. etc.
in about sixty days as suggested earlier etc.
etc."
  The Russian muttered, "Let me have the
fleet for a day, and I'll solve these
matyeryebitz and this whole problem."
  "Quite," Sir William agreed, adding in
fluent Russian, "sorry, my dear Count, but
we're here for a diplomatic solution,
preferably." Then in English, "Show them where
to wait, Johann. Shall we, gentlemen?" He
got up, bowed stiffly, and led the way into a
waiting room. As he passed Phillip Tyrer
he said, "Stay with them, keep your eyes and ears
open."
  All the Ministers headed for the tall chamber
pot that was in the corner of their anteroom. "My
God," Sir William said thankfully.
"Thought my bloody bladder would pop."
  Lun came in leading other servants with
trays. "Heya, Mass'er. Tea-ah,
sam'wich-ah!" He jerked a disdainful thumb
towards the other room. "All same give
monkees, heya?"
  "You'd better not let them hear you say that,
by God. Perhaps some of them speak pidgin."
  Lun stared at him. "Wat say, Mass'er?"
  "Oh never mind."
  Lun went out laughing to himself.
  "Well, gentlemen, as expected, progress
zero."
  Seratard was lighting his pipe, Andr`e Poncin
beside him, carelessly pleased with Sir William's
discomfiture. "What do you propose to do, Sir
William?"
  "What's your advice?"
  "It is a British problem, only partially
French. If it was entirely mine I would have already
settled it with French @elan--on the day it
happened."
  "But of course, mein Herr, you would need
an equally fine fleet," von Heimrich said
curtly.
  "Of course. In Europe we have many, as you
know. And if it was Imperial French policy
to be here in strength as our British
allies, we would have had one or two fleets
here."
  "Yes, well ..." Sir William was
tired. "It's clear that your collective
advice is to be tough with them?"
  "Rough and tough," Count Zergeyev said.
  "Ja."
  "Of course," Seratard agreed. "I thought
that's what you had already in mind, Sir
William."
  The Minister munched on a sandwich and finished his
tea. "All right. I'll close the meeting now,
reconvene for ten tomorrow, with an ultimatum: a
meeting with the Sh@ogun within a week, the murderers,
the indemnity or else--with, er, of course your
joint approval."
  Seratard said, "I suggest, Sir
William, given it might be difficult for them
to deliver a meeting with the Sh@ogun, why not keep
that for later until we have reinforcements--and real
cause for a meeting with him. After all, this
exercise is a show of force to correct an
evil, not to implement Imperial policy, yours
or ours."
  "Wise," the Prussian said reluctantly.
  Sir William pondered the reasons behind the
suggestion but could find no fault or hidden
hazard. "Very well. We'll demand an "early
meeting" with the Sh@ogun. Agreed?"
  They nodded. "Excuse me, Sir
William," Andr`e Poncin said pleasantly,
"may I suggest that I tell them your decision--
for you to begin the meeting and then close it at once
would be somewhat of a loss of face. Yes?"
  "Very wise, Andr`e," Seratard said. As far
as the others knew, Poncin was just an occasional
trader with some knowledge of Japanese customs, a
smattering of Japanese, a personal friend and
occasional interpreter. In reality Poncin was a
highly regarded spy employed to uncover and
neutralize all British, German, and
Russian endeavors in the Japans. "Eh,
Sir William?"
  "Yes," Sir William said thoughtfully.
"Yes, you're right, Andr`e, thank you, I
shouldn't do it myself. Lun!"
  The door opened instantly. "Heya,
Mass'er?"
  "Fetch young Mass'er Tyrer quick quick!" Then
to the others, "Tyrer can do it for me. As
it's a British problem."

  When Phillip Tyrer returned to the other
reception room overlooking the forecourt, he went
up to Johann with as much dignity as he could
muster. The Bakufu officials paid no attention
and continued chatting, Yoshi sightly apart.
Misamoto was beside him--the only one not talking.
"Johann, give them Sir William's
compliments and tell them today's unsatisfactory
meeting is adjourned and they are to reconvene tomorrow
at ten for what he expects will be a
satisfactory conclusion to this unwarranted
affair: the murderers, the indemnity and a
guaranteed, early meeting with the Sh@ogun or
else."
  Johann blanched. "Just like that?"
  "Yes, exactly like that." Tyrer was also tired
of the shilly-shallying, constantly reminded of John
Canterbury's violent death, Malcolm
Struan's serious wounds and Angelique's
terror. "Tell them!"
  He watched Johann deliver the short
ultimatum in guttural Dutch. The
Japanese interpreter flushed and began the
lengthy translation as Tyrer studied the
officials carefully without appearing to do so. Four
were attentive, the last was not, the small man with
narrow eyes and callused hands that he had noticed
earlier--all other hands were well groomed. Again
this man began whispering to the youngest and most handsome
official, Watanabe, as he had been doing from
time to time all day.
  Wish to God I could understand what they were saying,
Tyrer thought irritably, more determined than ever
to do whatever was necessary to learn the language quickly.
  As the shocked and embarrassed interpreter
finished there was a silence, broken only by the
sucking in of breath though all faces remained
impassive. During the translation he had
noticed two glance surreptitiously at
Watanabe.
  Why?
  Now they seemed to be waiting. Watanabe
dropped his eyes, hid behind his fan and muttered
something. At once the narrow-eyed man beside him
stood awkwardly, and spoke briefly.
Relieved, they all got up and, without bowing,
silently trooped out, Watanabe last,
except for the interpreter.
  "Johann, they really got the message this
time," Tyrer said happily.
  "Yes. And they were very plenty pissed."
  "Obviously that's what Sir William
wanted."
  Johann mopped his brow. He was
brown-haired and medium height, thin, strong with a
hard lined face. "The sooner you're interpreter
the better. It's time I went home to my
mountains and snows while I've still got my head
intact. There're too many of these cretins,
they're too unpredictable."
  "As the interpreter, surely you have a
privileged position," Tyrer said uneasily.
"The first to know."
  "And the carrier of bad news! They're all
bad news, mon vieux. They hate us and
can't wait to throw us out. I made a contract with
your Foreign Office for two years, renewable
by mutual consent. The contract, she is up in
two months and three days and my English is
going to hell." Johann went to the sideboard
near the window and took a deep draft of the beer
he had ordered instead of tea. "No renewal,
whatever the temptation." He beamed suddenly.
"Merde, that's the problem about leaving here."
  Tyrer laughed at his pixy look.
"Musume? Your girl?"
  "You learn fast."

  In the forecourt the officials were getting into their
palanquins. All gardening activity had
stopped, the half dozen gardeners kneeling
motionless with heads to the earth. Misamoto was
waiting beside Yoshi, conscious that any mistake and
he would not be standing erect, desperately hoping
he had passed the first test. Somehow or another
I'll be useful to this bastard, he was thinking in
English, until I can get back aboard an
American ship and paradise and tell the
Captain how I was kidnapped off Harris's
staff by these poxy scum. ...
  He looked up, froze. Yoshi was watching
him. "Lord?"
  "What were you thinking?"
  "I was hoping I'd been of value, Sire.
I ... Look out behind you, Sire!" he
whispered.
  Andr`e Poncin was coming down the steps, heading for
Yoshi. Instantly his guards were a
protective screen. Unafraid Poncin bowed
politely and said in fair though halting
Japanese: "Lord, excuse please, can give
message from my Master, French High Lord,
please?"
  "What message?"
  "He say please perhaps you like see inside
steamship, engine, cannons. Asks humbly
invite you and officials." Poncin waited, saw
no reaction, except an imperious wave of the
fan in dismissal. "Thank you, Lord, please
excuse me." He walked away, sure he had
been right. On the first step he noticed Tyrer
watching him from the audience room window, bit
back a curse, and waved. Tyrer waved back.
  When the last samurai left the forecourt the
gardeners carefully resumed their work. One of them
shouldered his spade and limped away. Hiraga,
his head swathed with a filthy old cloth, his
kimono ragged and dirty, was happy with the success
of his spying. Now he knew how and when and where the
attack tomorrow should take place.

  Once more safe in his palanquin en route
back to the castle--with Misamoto, at his
orders, sitting at the far end--Yoshi let his
mind roam. He was still astonished at their
ill-mannered dismissal, not furious like the others,
just patient: revenge will be taken in a manner of
my own choosing.
  An invitation to see the engines of a warship and
to go over one? Eeee, an opportunity not to be
missed. Dangerous to accept but it will be done. His
eyes focused on Misamoto who was staring out of a
slit window. Certainly prisoner Misamoto
has been useful so far. Stupid of interpreters
not to translate accurately. Stupid of the
Russian to threaten us. Stupid for them to be so
rude. Stupid of the Chinese servant to call us
monkeys. Very stupid. Well, I shall deal with
them all, some sooner than others.
  But how to deal with the leaders and their fleet?
  "Misamoto, I have decided not to send you
back to the guard house. For twenty days you will be
housed with my retainers and continue to learn how
to behave like a samurai."
  Misamoto's head was on the floor of the
palanquin at once. "Thank you, Lord."
  "If you please me. Now, what will happen
tomorrow?"
  Misamoto hesitated, petrified: the first
rule of survival was never to carry bad news
to any samurai, to say nothing, volunteer
nothing, but if forced, to tell anyone only what you
think he wants to hear. Unlike there,
America, paradise on earth.
  The answer's obvious, he wanted to shout,
falling back into his habit of thinking in English
--the only thing that had kept him sane all the
years of his confinement--if you saw how they treat
each other in the gai-jin family I lived with,
how they treated me, sure a servant, but even so
like a man, better than I ever dreamed possible,
how every man can walk tall and carry a knife or
gun, 'cepting most black men, how impatient
they all are to solve a problem to hurry on to the
next--if necessary by fist or gun or cannonade
--where most everyone's equal under their law, and there
are no stinking daimyos or samurai who can
kill you when they wish ...
  Yoshi said softly, reading him: "Answer me
truthfully, always, if you value your life."
  "Of course, Lord, always." Petrified
Misamoto did as he was told blindly. "So
sorry, Lord, but unless they get what they want,
I think they'll, they will level Yedo."
  I agree, but only if we're stupid,
Yoshi thought. "Can their cannon do that?"
  "Yes, Lord. Not the castle but the city would be
fired."
  And that would be a stupid waste of Toranaga
resources. We would only have to replace them
all, peasants, artisans, courtesans and
merchants to service us as usual. "Then how would
you give them a little soup but no fish?" Yoshi
asked.
  "Please excuse me, I don't know, Lord,
I don't know."
  "Then think. And give me your answer at
dawn."
  "But ... yes, Lord."
  Yoshi leaned back on his silk cushions and
focused his mind on yesterday's meeting of the
Elders. Eventually Anjo had had to withdraw the
order to evacuate the castle for without a clear
majority the order would be invalid--so he, as
formal Guardian, had forbidden the Sh@ogun's
departure.
  I won, this time, but only because that stubborn old
fool, Toyama, insisted on voting for
his insane attack plan, thus neither for me or
against me. Anjo is right: the other two normally
vote with him against me. Not because of merit but because I
am who I am--the Toranaga who should have been
Sh@ogun, not that stupid boy.
  Because Yoshi was safe in his palanquin, alone
but for Misamoto who could not know his inner thoughts,
he allowed his mind to open the compartment marked
Nobusada, so secret, so volatile, so
dangerous, and permanent.
  What to do about him?
  I cannot contain him much longer. He's
infantile and now in the most dangerous claws of
all, those of the Princess Yazu: Emperor's
spy and fanatic against the Sh@ogunate who
broke her engagement to her adored childhood
playmate, a handsome and very eligible Prince, the
Sh@ogunate who forced her into permanent exile from
Ky@oto and all her family and friends and into a
marriage to a weakling whose erection is as limp as
a banner in summer and may never give her children.
  Now she has schemed this State visit
to Ky@oto to kowtow to the Emperor, a masterstroke
that will destroy the delicate balance of
centuries: Authority to subdue the whole
Empire is granted by Imperial Edict to the
Sh@ogun and his descendants who is also
appointed Lord High Constable. Therefore orders
issued by the Sh@ogun to the country are its laws.
  One consultation must lead to another, Yoshi
thought, and then the Emperor rules and we do not.
Nobusada will never realize it, his eyes clouded
by her guile.
  What to do?
  Again Yoshi went down the well-trodden but oh
so secret path: he is my legal liege lord.
I cannot kill him directly. He is too
well guarded unless I am prepared to throw away
my own life with the deed which, at the moment I am
not. Other means? Poison. But then I would be
suspect, correctly, and even if I could
escape the bonds that surround me--I'm just as
much prisoner as this Misamoto--the land would be
plunged into a never-ending civil war, gai-jin will
be the only gainers, and worse I would have betrayed
my oath of allegiance to the Sh@ogun, whoever he
is, and to the Legacy.
  I have to let others kill him for me. The
shishi? I could help them but to help enemies
committed to your own destruction is
dangerous. One other possibility. The gods.
  He permitted himself a smile. Good luck
and bad luck, wrote Sh@ogun Toranaga,
fortune and misfortune are to be left to Heaven
and natural law--they are not things that can be got
by praying or worked by some cunning device.
  Be patient, he heard Toranaga saying
to him. Be patient.
  Yes, I will be.
  Yoshi closed that compartment until the next time
and again considered the Council. What shall I tell
them? Of course by now they will know I met the
gai-jin. I will insist on one absolute rule
in future: we must send only clever men to these
meetings. What else? Certainly about their
soldiers, gigantic, with their scarlet uniforms
and short skirts and enormous feathered hats, every
man with a breech-loading gun, shining with care, as
cherished as any of our blades.
  Shall I tell them that these enemies are fools,
who have no finesse and can be ruled through their
impatience and hatreds--Misamoto told me enough
to conclude they are as fractious and hate-ridden as
any daimyo? No, this I will keep to myself. But
I will tell them tomorrow our Delegation will fail
unless we devise a delay gai-jin will be
happy to accept.
  What should that be?
  "That messenger, Misamoto," he said idly,
"the tall man with the big nose, why did he
speak like a woman, using women's words? Was he
a half man-half woman?"
  "I don't know, Sire. Maybe he was,
they have many aboard ship, Sire, though they hide
it."
  "Why?"
  "Don't know, Sire, difficult to understand
them. They don't talk open about fornication as we
do, of the best position or if a boy is better
than a woman. But about speaking like a woman: in
their language men and women, they all speak the
same, I mean they use the same words, Sire,
unlike Japanese. The few sailors I
met who could speak some words of our language,
men who'd been to Nagasaki, they spoke the
same as the big nose did because the only people they
speak with are whores, learning our words from our
whores. They don't know our women speak
different from us, from men, Sire, use different
words as civilized persons should."
  Yoshi hid his sudden excitement. Our whores
are their only real contact, he thought. And they
all have whores, of course. So one way to control
them, even attack them, is through their whores,
female or male.

  "I will not order my fleet to bombard Yedo
without a formal written order from the Admiralty,
or Foreign Office," the Admiral said, his
face flushed. "My instructions are to be
circumspect, like yours. We are NOT on a
punitive mission."
  "For God's sake, we have had an incident that
must be dealt with. Of course it's a punitive
mission!" Sir William was equally angry.
The eight bells of midnight sounded, and they were in
the Admiral's quarters aboard the flagship at
the round table, the General, Thomas Ogilvy, the
only other person present. The cabin was low,
large and heavy-beamed, and through the stern windows the
riding lights of other vessels could be seen.
"Again, I believe without force they will not budge."
  "Get the order, by God, and I'll budge
them." The Admiral refilled his own glass with
port from the almost empty cut-glass decanter.
"Thomas?"
  "Thanks." The General held out his glass.
  Trying to contain himself, Sir William said,
"Lord Russell has already given us instructions
to press the Bakufu for damages, twenty-five
thousand pounds, over Legation murders, the
Sergeant and Corporal last year--he will be
even more incensed over the current incident. I know
him, you don't," he added, exaggerating for
effect. "I won't receive his approval for three
months. We must obtain satisfaction now or the
murders will continue. Without your support I cannot
maneuver."
  "You have my full support, short of war,
by God. Bombarding their capital commits us
to war. We're not equipped for that. Thomas? You
agree?"
  The General said carefully, "To surround a
village like Hodogaya and eliminate a few
hundred savages and put a minor native
potentate into chains is a lot different than
trying to secure this vast city and invest the
castle."
  Witheringly, Sir William said, "Then what
about your "no conceivable operation that the
forces under my command cannot conclude
expeditiously"!"
  The General reddened. "What one says in
public as you well know bears little relation
to practice, as you well know! Yedo is
different."
  "Quite right." The Admiral drained his glass.
  "Then what do you propose?" The silence
grew. Suddenly the stem of Sir William's
glass snapped between his fingers, and the others jumped,
unprepared. "Damn!" he said, the destruction
somehow diminishing his rage. Carelessly he used the
napkin to mop up the wine. "I'm Minister here.
If I find it necessary to make it an order and you
refuse to obey, which of course you have a right to do,
I will ask for your immediate replacement, of course."
  The Admiral's neck went purple. "I have
already put the facts before the Admiralty. But
please don't mistake me: I am more than
ready to seek vengeance for the killing of Mr.
Canterbury and the attack on the others. If
it's Yedo, I merely require the written
order as I have said. There's no hurry, now or
in three months, these savages will pay as we
require, with this city or a hundred others."
  "Yes, they will, by God." Sir William
got up.
  "One more piece of necessary information before you go: I
cannot promise to stay at this anchorage much longer.
My fleet is unprotected, the sea bottom
dangerously shallow, weather promises to worsen,
and we're safer at Yokohama."
  "How much longer is safe?"
  "A day--I don't know, I've no control
over weather which this month is irascible, as you're
aware."
  "Yes, I'm aware. Well, I'll be off.
I require you both at the ten o'clock meeting
ashore. Kindly fire a salute at dawn when
we break out the colors. Thomas, please land
two hundred dragoons to secure the area around
the wharf."
  "May I ask why two hundred more men?" the
General asked quickly. "I've already put a
company ashore."
  "Perhaps I may wish to take hostages. Good
evening." He closed the door quietly.
  The two men stared after him. "Does he mean
it?"
  "I don't know, Thomas. But with the
Honorable, impetuous William bloody
Aylesbury you never know."

  In deep darkness another detachment of heavily
armed samurai came out of the main castle gate,
ran silently across the lowered drawbridge, then
over the bridge that spanned the wide moat heading
for the Legation area. Other companies were also
converging. More than two thousand samurai were in
place, with another thousand ready to move in when
ordered.
  Sir William was plodding up from the wharf with his
guard, an officer and ten Highlanders, through the
deserted streets. He was depressed and tired,
his mind on tomorrow, trying to conceive a way out of his
impasse. Another corner and another. At the
end of this street was the open space that led up to the
Legation.
  "My God, sorr, look there!"
  The space was crammed with silent samurai,
motionless and watching them. All heavily armed.
Swords, bows, spears, a few muskets. A
slight noise and Sir William's party
glanced around. The road back was blocked with
massed, equally silent warriors.
  "Christ," the young officer murmured.
  "Yes." Sir William sighed. This could be
one solution, but then God help every man jack of
them--the fleet would respond instantly.
"Let's go on. Have your men ready to fight if
need be, safety catches off."
  He led the way forward, not feeling brave, just
out of himself somehow, observing himself and the others as if
above the street. There was a narrow path between the
samurai, an officer at the head. As Sir
William came within ten feet, the man bowed
politely, equal to equal. Sir William
watched himself raise his hat with equal
politeness, and walk on. The soldiers
followed, rifles in hands, fingers on triggers.
  All the way up the hill. Same silence,
same watching. All the way to the gate. Massed
samurai, motionless. But none in their forecourt.
The forecourt and gardens were filled with Highlanders,
armed and ready, others on the roof and at the
windows. Soldiers opened then locked the gate
after him.
  Tyrer and all the rest of the staff were waiting in
the foyer, some in nightclothes, some part dressed and
they crowded around him. "My God,
Sir William," Tyrer said for all of them,
"we were petrified they'd captured you."
  "How long have they been here?"
  "Since about midnight, sir," an officer
said. "We had sentries at the bottom of the
hill. As the enemy arrived, these lads gave us
warning and fell back. We'd no way to warn you
or signal the fleet. If they wait till
dawn we can hold this place until more troops
arrive and the fleet opens up."
  "Good," he said quietly. "In that case I
suggest we all go to bed, leave a few men on
guard, and let the rest turn in."
  "Sir?" The officer was perplexed.
  "If they wanted to do us they would have done so already
without the silent treatment and ballyhoo." Sir
William saw them all staring at him and he
felt better, no longer depressed. He started
up the stairs. "Good night."
  "But, sir, don't you think ..." The words
trailed off.
  Sir William sighed wearily. "If you
wish to keep the men on duty, please do so--if
it will make you happier."
  A sergeant hurried into the foyer and called out,
"Sorr, they're all leaving! The wee buggers
are scarpering."
  Glanced out of the landing window, Sir William
saw that, sure enough, the samurai were melting into the
night.
  For the first time he became afraid. He had not
expected them to disappear. In moments the path down
the hill was clear and the space below empty. But he
sensed that they had not gone far, that every doorway and
nearby street would be crammed with enemies, all
waiting confidently to spring the trap.
  Thank God the other Ministers and most of our
lads are safe aboard. Thank God, he
thought, and walked on up the stairs with a step firm
enough to encourage those watching him.

                 

    Thursday, 18th September:
  The Inn of the Forty-seven Ronin was in a dingy
alley not far from Yedo castle, set back from the
dirt roadway, and almost hidden behind a high,
ill-kempt fence. From the street the inn appeared
drab and nondescript. Inside it was lush,
expensive, the fence solid.
Well-groomed gardens surrounded the sprawling
single-story building and its many, isolated
one-room bungalows set on low pilings and
reserved for special guests--and privacy. The
inn's patrons were well-to-do merchants, but also
it was a safe house for certain shishi.
  Now, just before dawn, it was peaceful, all
patrons, courtesans, mama-san, maids,
servants sleeping. Except the shishi.
Quietly they were arming themselves.
  Ori sat on the veranda of one of the little houses,
his kimono down around his waist. With great
difficulty, he was replacing the bandage over the
wound on his shoulder. The wound was fiery red now and
angry and agonizingly sensitive. His whole arm
throbbed and he knew a doctor was urgent. Even
so he had told Hiraga it was too dangerous
to fetch one or to go to one: "I might be
followed. We cannot risk it, too many spies and
Yedo is Toranaga sanctuary."
  "I agree. Go back to Kanagawa."
  "When the mission is over." His finger
slipped and brushed the festering sore and a pain
stabbed deep to his innards. There's no hurry,
a doctor can lance it and remove the poison, he
thought, only half believing it. Karma. And
karma if it continues to rot. He was so absorbed
that he did not hear the ninja slide over the fence
and creep up behind him.
  His heart twisted with fright as the ninja clapped
a hand over his mouth to prevent any outcry. "It
is me," Hiraga whispered angrily, then
released him. "I could have killed you twenty
times."
  "Yes." Ori forced a smile and pointed.
Amongst the bushes, was another samurai, the arrow
in his bow poised. "But he's on guard, not me."
  "Good." Hiraga greeted the guard and,
mollified, pulled off his face mask. "Are the
others inside and ready, Ori?"
  "Yes."
  "And your arm?"
  "Fine." Ori gasped and his face twisted in
pain as Hiraga's hand snaked out and grabbed his
shoulder. Tears seeped from his eyes but he
remained silent.
  "You're a liability. You cannot go with us today--you
will go back to Kanagawa." Hiraga stepped on
to the veranda and went inside. Greatly dispirited,
Ori followed.
  Eleven shishi were seated on the fine tatami,
armed. Nine were Hiraga's compatriots from
Choshu. Two newcomers were from the Mori
patrol that had let them pass yesterday, later
to desert and beg permission to join them.
  Hiraga sat, tiredly. "I could not get within
two hundred paces of the temple or the
Legation, so we cannot fire it and kill Lord
Yoshi and the others when they arrive. Impossible.
We must ambush him elsewhere."
  "Excuse me, Hiraga-san, but are you
certain it was Lord Yoshi?" one of the Mori men
asked.
  "Yes I'm sure."
  "I still cannot believe he would risk coming out of the
castle with a few guards just to meet some stinking
gai-jin, even disguised. He is too clever,
surely he would know he is the supreme target
for shishi, except the Sh@ogun, bigger even than
the traitor Anjo."
  "He is not clever, I recognized him, I
was close to him once in Ky@oto," Hiraga
said, secretly not trusting either of the Mori
samurai. "Whatever his reason, he could risk the
Legation once without guards, not twice.
Surely that is why the area is awash with
Bakufu samurai. But tomorrow he will be outside the
castle again. It is an opportunity we cannot
miss. Could we mount an ambush somewhere?
Anyone?"
  "Depends on the number of samurai with the
cortege," a Mori samurai said. "If a
meeting is held as the gai-jin want."
  "If? Would Lord Yoshi try a stratagem?"
  "I would, if I were him. They call him the
Fox."
  "What would you do?"
  The man scratched his chin. "I'd delay,
somehow."
  Hiraga frowned. "But if he goes to the
Legation as yesterday where would he be the most
vulnerable?"
  Ori said, "Getting out of his palanquin. The
gai-jin forecourt."
  "We can't get there, even with a suicide
rush."
  The silence gathered. Then Ori said quietly,
"The nearer to the castle gates the safer his
captains would feel, therefore the fewer their immediate
guards and the less their vigilance, coming out
... or going back in."
  Hiraga nodded, satisfied, and smiled at
him and motioned to one of his compatriots. "When the
house wakes, tell the mama-san to fetch Ori
a doctor, secretly and quickly."
  Ori said at once, "We agreed it is not
safe."
  "An asset must be protected. Your idea
is perfect."
  Ori bowed his thanks. "Better I go to the
doctor, neh?"

  In first light Phillip Tyrer half ran
half walked towards the wharf with two Highlanders,
a sergeant and a private in tow. "Good God,
Phillip, two guards are more than enough,"
Sir William had said a moment ago. "If
the Jappers intend mischief our entire
garrison won't be sufficient to protect you.
The message has to be delivered to Ketterer and
you're it. 'Bye!"
  Like Sir William he had had to pass through the
hundreds of silent samurai who had returned
just before dawn. No one molested him or even
seemed to acknowledge his presence other than a quick
flick of their eyes. Ahead now was the sea. His
pace quickened.
  "Halt, who goes there, or I'll blow yor
bloody head off," a voice said from the shadows and
he skidded to a stop.
  "For Christ's sake," Tyrer said,
palpitating with fright. "Who the hell d'you think
it is, it's me with an urgent message for the
Admiral and General."
  "Sorry, sir."
  Quickly Tyrer was in a cutter being rowed
briskly towards the flagship. He was so glad
to be out of the Legation trap he could almost weep and
urged the oarsmen on faster, then went up the
gangway two rungs at a time.
  "Hello, Phillip!" Marlowe was officer
of the watch on the main deck. "What the devil's
up?"
  "Hello, John, where's the Admiral?
I've an urgent dispatch for him from Sir
William. The Legation's surrounded by thousands
of the bastards."
  "Christ!" Anxiously Marlowe led the way
down a gangway then aft. "How the hell did
you get out?"
  "Just walked. They let me through their ranks,
didn't say a bloody word, not one of them, just
let me through. I don't mind telling you I was
scared fartless--they're everywhere, except inside
our walls and down by our wharf."
  The Marine sentry outside the cabin door
saluted smartly. "Morning, sir."
  "Urgent dispatch for the Admiral."
  At once the voice slashed through the door:
"Then for God's sake, Marlowe bring it in!
Dispatch from whom?"
  Marlowe sighed, opened the door. "Sir
William, sir."
  "What the hell's that idiot done n--"
Admiral Ketterer stopped, seeing Tyrer.
"Oh, you're his aide, aren't you?"
  "Apprentice interpreter, sir, Phillip
Tyrer." He handed him the letter, "Er, Sir
William's compliments, sir."
  The Admiral tore the letter open. He was
wearing a long flannel nightgown and tasselled
sleeping hat and thin-rimmed reading glasses and
he pursed his lips as he read:


I consider it best to cancel your appearance at the
meeting today, as well as the General and the other
Ministers. We are totally surrounded
by hundreds, if not thousands of heavily armed
samurai. Thus far they have done nothing hostile,
or prevented anyone from leaving, yet. Certainly
they have the right to put their own troops where they wish
--perhaps it's just a bluff to unhinge us. For
safety, however, I will handle the Bakufu
alone, if they appear as demanded. (if this
occurs I will run up a blue pennant and will
endeavour to keep you advised of developments.)
If the Bakufu do not appear I will wait
another day or two, then may have to order an
ignominious withdrawal. In the meantime, if you
see the flag hauled down it will mean they have
overrun us. You may then take whatever action you
see fit. I am, Sir, your obedient
servant. ...

  Carefully the Admiral reread the letter, then
said decisively, "Mr. Marlowe, ask the
Captain and General to join me here at once.
Send the following message to all ships: "You
will instantly go to action stations. All
Captains to report aboard the flagship at
noon." Next, send a signal to the Ministers
asking them to be kind enough to join me here as soon as
possible. Mr. Tyrer, get yourself some breakfast
and be ready to carry back a reply within a few
minutes."
  "But, sir, don't you think--"
  The Admiral was already bellowing at the closed
door. "Johnson!"
  Instantly his orderly opened the door.
"Barber's on his way, sir, your uniform's
freshly ironed, breakfast's ready the moment
you're at table, the porridge's hot!"
  Ketterer's look fell on Marlowe and
Tyrer. "What the devil are you waiting for?"

  At Yokohama the Struan cutter--the only
steam engine, propeller-driven, small boat in
the Japans--swung against their wharf, wind brisk
with a slight swell to the grey sea under the
overcast. Jamie McFay climbed nimbly
up the steps, then hurried along its length heading
for their two-story building dominating the High
Street. It was barely eight o'clock but he had
already been out to meet the bimonthly mail ship that
had arrived with the dawn, to collect mail,
dispatches and the latest newspapers that his Chinese
assistant began to load into a cart. Clutched in
his hand were two envelopes, one opened the other
sealed.
  "'Morning, Jamie." Gabriel
Nettlesmith intercepted him, stepping out from a
small group of sleepy traders waiting for their
boats. He was a short, roly-poly,
untidy, smelly man, reeking of ink and
unwashed clothes and the cigars that he smoked
perpetually, editor and publisher of the
Yokohama Guardian, the Settlement's
newspaper, one of the many in Asia that Struan's
owned, openly or secretly. "What's
amiss?"
  "Lots--be kind enough to join me for tiffin.
Sorry, can't stop."
  Even without the fleet at anchor the harbor was
already busy with cutters plying to and from the half a
hundred merchantmen, others clustering the mail
ship, still others heading for her or coming back.
Jamie was the first ashore, a matter of
principle with him and a business expedient where
prices of essential items, always in
short supply, could fluctuate wildly
depending on the mails. Hong Kong
to Yokohama direct by mail steamer took about
nine days, via Shanghai, about eleven, weather
permitting. Mail from home, England, took
eight to twelve weeks, weather and piracy
permitting, and mail day always an anxious time,
joyous, awful or in between but ever welcome,
waited for and prayed for nonetheless.
  Norbert Greyforth of Brock and Sons,
Struan's main rival, was still a hundred yards
offshore, sitting comfortably amidships, his
oarsmen pulling hard, watching him through his
telescope. McFay knew he was being observed
but it did not bother him today. The bugger will know
soon enough if he doesn't know already, he thought,
feeling uncommonly frightened. Frightened for
Malcolm Struan, the Company, himself, for the
future and for his ai-jin--love person--who
waited equally patiently in their tiny Yoshiwara
house across the canal, outside the fence.
  He increased his pace. Three or four
drunks lay in the gutter of High Street like
old sacks of coal, others scattered here and there
down along the seafront. He stepped over one
man, avoided a raucous group of inebriated
merchant seamen staggering for their boats, ran up his
steps into the large foyer of Struan's, up the
staircase to the landing and down the corridor that led
to suites of rooms the whole length of the godown.
  Quietly he opened a door and peered in.
  "Hello, Jamie," Malcolm Struan said
from the bed.
  "Oh, hello, Malcolm, 'morning. I
wasn't sure if you'd be awake." He closed
the door behind him, noticed that the door to the
adjoining suite was ajar, and went over to the huge
teak four-poster that, like all the furniture,
came from Hong Kong or England. Malcolm
Struan was pasty-faced, and drawn, propped on
pillows--the boat trip back from Kanagawa
yesterday had drained more of his precious strength
even though Dr. Babcott had kept him
sedated and they had made the journey as smooth as
possible. "How are you today?"
  Struan just peered up at him, his blue eyes
seemingly faded and set deeper into their sockets,
shadows underneath. "Mail from Hong Kong's not
good, eh?" The words were flat, and gave McFay
no way to break it easily.
  "Yes, sorry. You heard the signal gun?"
Whenever the mail ship came within sight, it was
custom for the Harbor Master to fire a cannon
to alert the Settlement--the same procedure all
over the world, wherever there were Settlements.
  "Yes, I did," Struan said. "Before you
tell me the bad, close her door and give me
the chamber pot."
  McFay obeyed. The other side of the door was
a drawing room and beyond that a bedroom, the best
apartment in the whole building and normally reserved
exclusively for the tai-pan, Malcolm's father.
Yesterday at Malcolm's insistence and her
happy compliance, Angelique had been installed
there. At once the news had rushed around the
Settlement, feeding other reports and rumors that
their Angelique had become the new Lady of the
Lamp, and the betting odds on that she was Struan's
in more ways than one, every man wanting to be in his
bed.
  "You're mad," McFay had told some of
them at the Club last night. "The poor
fellow's in terrible shape."
  Dr. Babcott interrupted, "He'll be
up and about before you know it."
  "It's got to be wedding bells, by God!"
someone said.
  "Drinks on the house," another called out
expansively, "Good-oh, we'll have our own
wedding, our first wedding."
  "We've had lots, Charlie, what about our
musumes?"'
  "They don't count for God's sake, I
mean a real church wedding--and a right proper
christening an--"'
  "Jumping Jehovah, are you implying one's
in the oven?"'
  "The rumor's they was like stoats on the ship
coming here, not that I blame him ..."
  "Angel Tits weren't even feeanced then,
by God! Say that agin', impugg'ning 'er
'onor, and I'll do you by God!"
  McFay sighed. A few drunken blows and
broken bottles, both men had been thrown out
to crawl back within the hour to an uproarious
welcome. Last night, when he had peeped in
here before going to bed himself, Malcolm was asleep and
she was nodding in a chair beside the bed. He awoke
her gently. "Best get some proper sleep,
Miss Angelique, he won't wake
now."
  "Yes, thank you, Jamie."
  He had watched her stretch luxuriously like a
contented young feline, half asleep, hair down
around her bared shoulders, her gown high waisted and
loose, falling in folds that the Empress
Josephine had favored fifty years before and some
Parisian haute couturiers were trying
to reintroduce, all of her pulsating with a
male-attracting life force. His own suite was
along the corridor. For a long time he had not
slept.
  Sweat soaked Struan. The effort of using the
chamber pot was vast with little to show for all the pain,
no feces and just a little blood-flecked urine.
"Jamie, now what's the bad?"
  "Oh, well you see ..."
  "For Christ sake tell me!"
  "Your father passed away nine days ago, same
day the mail ship left Hong Kong direct us,
not via Shanghai. His funeral was due three
days later. Your mother asks me to arrange your
return at once. Our mail ship from here with
news of your, your bad luck won't arrive
Hong Kong for another four or five days at the
earliest. Sorry," he added lamely.
  Struan only heard the first sentence. The news
was not unexpected and yet it came as violent a
slash as the wound in his side. He was very glad and
very sad, mixed up, excited that at long last he
could really run the company that he had trained for
all his life, that for years had been
hemorrhaging, for years held together by his mother who
quietly persuaded, cajoled, guided and helped
his father over the bad times. The bad was constant and
mostly due to drink that was his father's medicine
to cushion blinding headaches and attacks of
Happy Valley ague, mal-aria, bad
air, the mysterious killing fever that had
decimated Hong Kong's early population but
now, sometimes, was held in abeyance by a bark
extract, quinine.
  Can't remember a year when Father wasn't
laid up at least twice with the shakes, for a month
or more, his mind wandering for days on end. Even
infusions of the priceless cinchona bark that Grandfather
had had brought from Peru had not cured him, though it
had stopped the fever from killing him, and most
everyone else. But it hadn't saved poor little
Mary, four years old then, me seven
and forever after aware of death, the meaning of it and its
finality.
  He sighed heavily. Thank God nothing
touched Mother, neither plague nor ague nor age
nor misfortune, still a young woman, not yet
thirty-eight, still trim after seven children, a steel
support for all of us, able to ride every disaster, every
storm, even the bitter, perpetual hatred and
enmity between her and her father, godrotting Tyler
Brock ... even the tragedy last year when the
darling twins, Rob and Dunross, were drowned off
Shek-O where our summer house is. And now
poor Father. So many deaths.
  Tai-pan. Now I'm tai-pan of the Noble
House.
  "What? What did you say, Jamie?"
  "I just said I was sorry, Tai-pan, and here,
here's a letter from your mother."
  With an effort Struan took the envelope.
"What's the fastest way for me to get back
to Hong Kong?"
  "Sea Cloud but she isn't due for two
to three weeks. The only merchantmen here at the
moment are slow, none due for Hong Kong for a
week. Mail ship would be the fastest. We could
get her to turn around right smartly but she's going
via Shanghai."
  After yesterday, the idea of an eleven-day
voyage more than likely with bad seas, even
typhoon, horrified Malcolm. Even so he
said, "Talk to the captain. Persuade him to go
direct Hong Kong. What else's in the
mails?"
  "I haven't been through them yet, but here ..."
Greatly concerned with Struan's sudden pallor,
McFay offered the Hong Kong Observer.
"Nothing but bad, I'm afraid: The American
civil war's picking up steam, seesawing with tens
of thousands of deaths--battles at Shiloh,
Fair Oaks, dozens of places, another at
Bull Run with the Union army the loser and
decimated. War's changed forever now with
breech-loading rifles and machine guns and
rifled cannon. Price of cotton's gone
sky high with the Union blockade of the South.
Another panic on the London Stock
Exchange and Paris--rumors that Prussia will
invade France imminently. Since the Prince
Consort died in December, Queen Victoria
still hasn't appeared in public--it's
rumored she's pining to death. Mexico: we've
pulled our forces out now it's apparent nutter
Napoleon III'S determined to make it a
French domain. Famine and riots all over
Europe." McFay hesitated. "Can I get
you anything?"
  "A new stomach." Struan glanced at the
envelope clenched in his hand. "Jamie, leave me
the paper, go through the mails then come back and
we'll decide what to do here before I leave ..."
A slight noise and they both glanced back at
the adjoining door that now was half open. She was
standing there, elegant peignoir over her
nightdress.
  "Hello, ch@eri," she said at once.
"I thought I heard voices. How are you today?
Good morning, Jamie. Malcolm, you look so
much better, can I get you anything?"
  "No thank you. Come in. Sit down, you
look wonderful. Sleep well?"
  "Not really, but never mind," she said though she
had slept wonderfully. Her perfume surrounding
her, she touched him sweetly, and sat down. "Shall
we breakfast together?"
  McFay dragged his attention off her. "I'll
come back when I've made the arrangements.
I'll tell George Babcott."
  When the door had closed, she smoothed
Struan's brow, and he caught her hand, loving
her. The envelope slipped to the floor. She
picked it up. A little frown. "Why so sad?"
  "Father's dead."
  His sadness brought her tears. She had always
found it easy to cry, to make tears almost at will,
seeing from a very early age their effect on others,
her aunt and uncle particularly. All she had
to do was to think of her mother who had died bearing her
brother. "But Angelique," her aunt would
always say tearfully, "poor little Gerard is your
only brother, you'll never have another, not a real
one, even if that good-for-nothing father of yours
remarries."
  "I hate him."
  "It wasn't his fault, poor lad, his
birth was ghastly."
  "I don't care, he killed Maman,
killed her!"
  "Don't cry, Angelique. ..."
  And now Struan was saying the same words, the
tears easy because she was truly sad for
him. Poor Malcolm to lose a father--he was a
nice man, nice to me. Poor Malcolm
trying to be brave. Never mind, soon you'll be
well and now it's much easier to stay, now that the
smell has gone, most of the smell has gone.
A sudden spectre of her own father came into her
mind: "Don't forget this Malcolm will inherit
everything soon, the ships and power and ..."
  I won't think about that. Or ... or about the
other.
  She dried her eyes. "There, now tell me
everything."
  "Nothing much to tell. Father's dead. The
funeral was days ago and I have to go back to Hong
Kong at once."
  "Of course at once--but not until you are
well enough." She leaned forward and kissed him
lightly. "What will you do when we get there?"
  In a moment he said firmly, "I'm heir.
I'm tai-pan."
  "Tai-pan of the Noble House?" She made
her surprise seem genuine then, she added
delicately, "Malcolm, dear, terrible about
your father, but ... but in a way not unexpected,
no? My father told me he had been sick a
long time."
  "It was expected yes."
  "That is sad but ... tai-pan of the Noble
House, even so, please may I be the first
to congratulate you." She curtseyed to him as
elegantly as to a king, and sat back again,
pleased with herself. His eyes watched her
strangely. "What?"
  "Just that you, you make me feel so proud, so
wonderful. Will you marry me?"
  Her heart missed a beat, her face flushed.
But her mind ordered her to be prudent, not
to hurry, and she pondered whether to be as grave as
he was grave, or to release the exploding
exuberance she felt at his question and her victory and
to make him smile. "La!" she said brightly,
teasing him, fanning herself with a handkerchief. "Yes
I will marry you, Monsieur Struan, but only
if you ..." A hesitation and she added in a rush,
"only if you get better quickly, obey me
implacable, cherish me hugely, love me
to distraction, build us a castle on the Peak in
Hong Kong, a palace on the
Champs-Elys`ees, fit out a clipper ship as
a bridal bed, a nursery in gold, and
find us a country estate of a million
hectares!"
  "Be serious. Angelique, listen to me,
I'm serious!"
  Oh but I am, she thought, delighted that he was
smiling now. A gentle kiss but this time on the
lips, full of promise. "There, Monsieur,
now don't taunt this defenseless young lady."
  "I'm not taunting you, I swear to God.
Will-you-marry-me?" Strong words but he did not have
the strength to sit up yet or reach out to bring her
closer. "Please."
  Her eyes still teased. "Perhaps, when you're
better--and only if you obey me implacable,
cherish me ..."
  "Implacably, if that's the word you want."
  "Ah yes, pardon. Implacably ...
etceteras." Again the lovely smile. "Perhaps
yes, Monsieur Struan, but first we must get
to know each other, then we must agree to an
engagement, and then, Monsieur le tai-pan
de la Noble Maison, who knows?"
  Joy possessed all of him. "Then it's
yes?"
  Her eyes watched him, making him wait. With
all the tenderness she could muster, she said, "I will
consider it seriously--but first you must promise
to get well quickly."
  "I will, I swear it."
  Again she dried her eyes. "Now, Malcolm,
please read your mother's letter, and I'll sit with
you."
  His heart was beating strongly and the elation he
felt took away the pain. But his fingers were not so
obedient and he had trouble breaking the seal. "Here,
Angel, read it to me, will you please?"
  At once she broke the seal and scanned the
singular writing that was on the single page. ""My
beloved son,"" she read aloud, ""With great
sadness I must tell you your father is dead and now
our future rests with you. He died in his sleep,
poor man, the funeral will be in three days, the
dead must cherish the dead and we, the living, must
continue the struggle while we have life. Your
father's Will confirms you as heir, and tai-pan, but
to be legal the succession has to be done with a
ceremony witnessed by me and Compradore Chen in
accordance with your beloved grandfather's Legacy.
Settle our Japanese interests as we
discussed and return as quickly as you can.
yr devoted Mother."" Tears filled her
eyes again because of a sudden fantasy that she was the mother
writing to her son.
  "That's all? No postscript?"
  "No, ch@eri, nothing more, just "your devoted
mother." How brave of her. Would that I could be so
brave."
  Oblivious to everything except the portent of
these happenings, she gave him the letter and went to the
window that looked out on to the harbor and, drying her
eyes, opened it. The air was fresh and took
away the sickroom smell. What to do now?
Help him to hurry back to Hong Kong away from
this foul place. Wait ... will his mother favor our
marriage? I don't know. Would I if I was
her? I know she didn't like me, the few times we
met, so tall and distant, though Malcolm said
she was that way with everyone outside family.
"Wait till you get to know her Angelique,
she's so wonderful and strong ..."
  Behind her the door opened and Ah Tok came in
without knocking, a small tea tray in one hand.
"Neh hoh mah, Mass'r," good day, she
said with a beam, showing the two gold teeth of which she
was very proud. "Mass'r slepp good heya?"
  In fluent Cantonese, Malcolm said,
"Stop speaking gibberish."
  "Ayeeyah!" Ah Tok was Struan's
personal amah who had looked after him since he
was born and a law unto herself. She hardly
acknowledged Angelique, her concentration on
Struan. Stout, strong and fifty-six, wearing the
traditional white smock and black trousers, the
long queue hanging down her back signified that
she had chosen amah as her profession and had
therefore sworn to remain chaste all her life and so
never to have children of her own that might divert her
loyalty. Two Cantonese manservants
followed with hot towels and water to bathe him.
Loudly, she ordered them to close the door.
"Mass'r bar'f, heya?" she said pointedly
to Angelique.
  "I will come back later, ch@eri," the girl
said. Struan did not answer, just nodded and smiled
back then stared again at the letter, lost in thought. She
left her door ajar. Ah Tok grunted
disapprovingly, shut it firmly, told the other
two to hurry up with his bed bath, and handed him the
tea.
  "Thank you, Mother," he said, in
Cantonese, using the customary honorific for
such a special person who had cherished and carried
and guarded him when defenseless.
  "Bad news, my son," Ah Tok said--the
tidings had rushed through the Chinese community.
  "Bad news." He sipped the tea. It
tasted very good.
  "After you have bathed you will feel better and then we
can talk. Your Honorable Father was overdue his
appointment with the gods. He's there now and you are
tai-pan so the bad has become good. Later this
morning I'll bring some extra-special tea
I've bought for you that will cure all your ills."
  "Thank you."
  "You owe me a tael of silver for the medicine."
  "A fiftieth part."
  "Ayeeyah, at least half."
  "Ayeeyah, a twentieth part, Mother." With
hardly any thought he bargained automatically, but
not unkindly, "and if you argue I'll remind you
you owe me six months wages paid in advance for
your grandmother's funeral--her second."
  One of the servants chortled behind her but she
feigned not to notice. "If you say so,
Tai-pan." She used the title delicately,
the first time she had ever said it to him, watching him,
missing nothing, then snapped at the two men
sponging and cleaning him carefully and efficiently:
"Hurry up with your work. Does my son, the
tai-pan, have to endure your clumsy ministrations
all day?"
  "Ayeeyah," one of them unwisely muttered
back.
  "Take care, you motherless fornicator," she said
sweetly in a dialect Struan did not understand.
"Just get on with it and if you nick my son while
shaving I'll put the Evil Eye on you.
Treat my son like Imperial jade or your
fruit will be pulverized--and don't listen to your
betters!"
  "Betters? Ayeeyah, old woman, you come
from Ning Tok, a turtle dung village
famous only for farts."
  "A tael of silver says this civilized
person can whip you five out of seven times at
mahjong this evening."
  "Done!" the man said truculently even though
Ah Tok was an accomplished player.
  "What's all that about?" Struan said.
  "Servants talk, nothing
important, my son."
  When they had finished they gave him a fresh
crisp night shirt. "Thank you," Struan said
to them, greatly refreshed. They bowed politely and
were gone.
  "Ah Tok, bolt her door, quietly."
  She obeyed. Her sharp ears heard the rustle
of skirts in the adjoining room and she resolved
to increase her vigilance. Nosey, foreign
devil toad belly whore with her Jade Gate
so hungry for the Master a civilized person can
almost hear it salivating ...
  "Light the candle for me please."
  "Eh? Are your eyes hurting you, my son?"
  "No, nothing like that. There are safety matches
in the bureau." Safety matches, the recent
Swedish patent, were usually kept locked away
as they were highly sought after, therefore had a ready
sale and therefore had a habit of disappearing.
Petty theft was endemic in Asia. Uneasily
she used one, not understanding why they would not light
unless the side of their special box was struck.
He had explained why but she only muttered about
more foreign devil magic.
  "Where do you want the candle, my son?"
  He pointed at the bedside table within easy
reach. "Here. Now leave me for a little while."
  "But, ayeeyah, we should talk, there is much
to plan."
  "I know. Just wait outside the door and keep
everyone away until I call."
  Grumbling she walked out. So much talk and
bad news had exhausted him. Nonetheless,
painfully he balanced the candle on the side of the
bed, then lay back a moment.
  Four years ago on his sixteenth birthday his
mother had taken him to the Peak to speak privately:
"Now you are old enough to learn some secrets of the
Noble House. There will always be secrets. Some
your father and I keep from you until you become
tai-pan. Some I keep from him, and some from you.
Some I will now share with you and not with him, or your
brothers and sisters. Under no circumstances are
these secrets to be shared with anyone. Anyone. You
promise before God."
  "Yes Mother, I swear it."
  "First: perhaps one day we may need to give
each other personal or dangerous information in a
private letter--never forget anything in writing may
be read by alien eyes. Whenever I
write to you I will always add, P.s. I love
you. You will do the same, always, without fail. But if
there is no P.s. I love you, then the letter
contains important and secret information, from me
to you or you to me only. Watch!" Shielding the
paper she had prepared, she lit some safety
matches and held them under the paper, not to fire it
but to almost scorch it, line by line.
Miraculously, the hidden message appeared:
Happy Birthday, under your pillow there's a
sight draft for ten thousand pounds. Keep it
secretly, spend it wisely.
  "Oh Mother, there is? There really is, ten
thousand?"'
  "Yes."
  "Ayeeyah! But how do you do it? The
writing?"'
  "Take a clean quill or pen and write
your message carefully in a liquid I will
give you, or milk, and let it dry. When you
heat the paper as I did, the writing will
appear." She used another match and gravely
lit a corner of the paper. In silence they watched
it burn. She ground the ashes to dust under her tiny
high-booted foot. "When you're tai-pan,
trust no one," adding strangely, "even
me."
  Now, Struan held her sad letter over the
candle's flame. The words came into view, no
mistaking her handwriting:

Sorry to tell your father died raving, besotted
with whisky. He must have bribed a servant to sneak
it in again. Much more to tell in person. Thank
God he's out of his misery but it was the Brocks,
my cursed father and my brother Morgan, who
give us no peace and caused his strokes--the
final one came just after you left when we discovered
details, too late, of their secret
Hawaiian coup against us. Jamie has a few
details.

  For a moment he stopped reading, sick with rage.
Soon there'll be a reckoning, he promised
himself then read on:

Beware of our friend, Dmitri Syborodin.
We discover he's a secret agent for that
revolutionary, President Lincoln, not the
South as he pretends. Beware of
Angelique Richaud ...
  His heart twisted with sudden fright: Our
Paris agents write that her uncle Michel
Richaud went bankrupt shortly after she left
and is now in Debtor's Prison. More facts:
her father keeps very poor company, has very
substantial gambling debts, and secretly
boasts to intimates he'll soon represent
all our French interests--received your letter of the 4th
recommending this, presume at her instigation--he
won't, he's insolvent. Another of his
"secrets": you'll be his son-in-law within a
year. Of course, ridiculous, you are far too
young for marriage, and I could not conceive of a worse
connection. Singly or together they are out to snare you,
my son. Be circumspect and beware of feminine
guile.

  For the first time in his life he was furious with his
mother. Shakily, he shoved the paper into the flame,
held it while it burned then pulverized the ash
to nothingness, smashed the flame out and sent the candle
skittering and lay back nauseated, heart pounding,
all the time his mind shouting; how dare she
investigate Angelique and her family without
asking me! How dare she be so wrong! Whatever
sins they committed Angelique is not to blame.
Mother of all people should know the sins of the fathers are not
to be blamed on the children! Wasn't my beloved
grandfather much worse, wasn't he a killer and not
much more than a pirate, as her father still is? She's
a bloody hypocrite! It's none of her
business who I marry. It's my life and if
I want to marry Angelique next year I
will. Mother knows nothing about Angelique--and when she
knows the truth she'll love her as I do--or
else by God! She ...
  "Oh Christ," he gasped as pain ripped him
apart.

                 

  McFay looked up from the piles of letters,
documents and journals littering his desk. "How
is he?" he asked anxiously as Dr.
Babcott came in and closed the door. The
office was spacious, facing the High Street and the
sea.
  "It was a stomach seizure of some kind,
Jamie. To be expected, I'm
afraid, poor chap. I dressed his wound--
he'd torn a few stitches. I gave him a
draft of laudanum." Babcott rubbed his
eyes, red-rimmed with fatigue, his frock coat
heavy and frayed at the sleeves and stained, here and
there, with chemicals and dried blood. "Not much more
I can do for him at the moment. What's the latest
from the fleet?"
  "Status quo: the fleet's at action stations,
Legation's still surrounded, the Bakufu are
supposed to appear soon."
  "What happens if they don't?"
  McFay shrugged. "I've had orders to get
Malcolm back to Hong Kong as soon as
possible--very important for him. I can get him
on the mail sh--"
  "I absolutely forbid it," Babcott said
with more anger than he intended. "That would be stupid
and highly dangerous, highly dangerous. If they
got into a storm which is likely this time of the year
... well, severe and prolonged vomiting would
tear the repairs apart--which would kill him. No!"
  "Then when will it be safe?"
  The doctor glanced out of the windows.
Whitecaps out past the headland, none in the bay.
Sky overcast. He weighed his helplessness against
his knowledge. "At least a week, perhaps a month. God
knows, Jamie, I don't."
  "If you were to go on the mail ship, would that
help?"
  "For Christ's sake, no! Didn't you hear
me clearly? No. No! He's not to move.
Nine days on a ship would kill him."
  McFay's face closed. "What are
Malcolm's chances? Really. It's very
important I know."
  "Still good. His temperature's more or less
normal and there's no sign of any festering."
Babcott rubbed his eyes again and yawned.
"Sorry, didn't mean to snap at you. Been
up since midnight patching the results of a
sailor versus soldier Drunk Town brawl,
and a dawn emergency in the Yoshiwara, had to sew
up a young woman who tried to cut herself into the
next world." He sighed. "It would help to keep
him as calm as possible. I'd say his bad
news probably brought on the attack."
  The knowledge and implications of Culum Struan's
death and therefore Malcolm's new status as
tai-pan--of vital and immediate concern
to all their rivals--had rushed through the
Settlement. In Brock's, Norbert
Greyforth had interrupted a meeting to open the first
bottle of champagne from the case he had had
kept chilled against this day for many weeks--chilled
in their new, and highly profitable Ice House
next door to their godown. "Best news we've
had in years," he chortled to Dmitri, "and
I've another twenty cases for the party I'm
throwing tonight. A toast, Dmitri!" He raised
his cut glass, the best Venetian that money could
buy. "Here's to the tai-pan of the Noble House:
out with the Old, out with the New by God, and may they be
bankrupt within the year!"
  "I'll drink with you, Norbert, to the success
of the new tai-pan, none of the rest," Dmitri
said.
  "Open your eyes to reality. They're the old,
we're the new--once they had guts when Dirk
Struan was alive but now they're weak,
McFay's weak--why with his enthusiastic help
and a little persuasion on the night of Canterbury's
murder we could have roused the whole Settlement, the
fleet, the Army, we'd have captured this bugger
Satsuma king, hanged him, and be living
happily ever after."
  "I agree. John Canterbury's going
to be revenged, one way or another. Poor
bastard," Dmitri said. "You know he left
me his business?"' Canterbury's was one of the
smaller trading houses, specializing in the
export of silk cloth, and particularly
cocoons and silkworm eggs, a highly
lucrative trade to France where the silk
industry, once the best in the world, had been
decimated by disease. "John always said he would but
I never believed him. I'm his Executor too
--Wee Willie gave me the deed before he
left."
  "Samurai are all bastards, no reason
to murder him like that. What about his musume? Old
John was beset by her. She's carrying, isn't
she?"'
  "No, that was a rumor. In his will he asked
me to take care of her, give her money to buy
her own shack. I went to see her but her
mama-san, Raiko, that old bat, she told
me the girl had gone back to her village but
she'd send on any money. I paid over what
John had said so that was that."
  Thoughtfully Norbert finished his wine and poured
more and felt better. "You should take care of yourself
too," he said keeping his voice down, judging
the time ripe. "You've the future to think of, not
a few rolls of cloth and worm eggs. Consider
the Great Game, the American game. With our
contacts we can buy any amount of British,
French or Prussian armaments--we've just
signed an exclusive deal to represent
Krupp's in the Far East--at better prices
than Struan's can give you, have them delivered in
Hawaii for transshipment to ... to wherever, no
questions asked."
  "I'll drink to that."
  "Whatever you want, we can get cheaper and
faster." Norbert refilled their glasses.
"I like Dom P@erignon, it's better than
Tatt--that old monk knew about color and
sugar, and the lack of it. Like Hawaiian
sugar," he added delicately, "I hear
it's going to be so pricey this year to be almost a
national treasure, for North or South."
  Dmitri's glass stopped in midair.
"Meaning?"'
  "Meaning, just between us, Brock and Sons have the
lock on this year's crop, meaning that Struan's
won't have so much as a hundred-pound sack so your
deal with them won't happen."
  "When's this going to be common knowledge?"'
Dmitri's eyes slitted.
  "Would you like to be part of it? Our deal? We
could use a trustworthy agent for the States,
North and South."
  Dmitri poured for both of them, enjoying the touch
of the chilled glass. "In return for what?"'
  "A toast: to the demise of the Noble
House!"

  Throughout Yokohama other toasts were being quaffed
at the rare tidings of Culum's death and the
succession of a new tai-pan, and in boardrooms
throughout the Far East, and elsewhere, that traded with
Asia. Some toasts were celebratory, some
vindictive, some toasted the succession, some blessed
all Struan bones to the devil, some prayed for
their success but all men of business considered how
the news would affect them for, like it or not,
Struan's was the Noble House.
  In the French Legation Angelique clinked
glasses, sipped the champagne
warily, her glass cheap and barely adequate,
like the wine. "Yes, I agree, Monsieur
Vervene."
  Pierre Vervene was the Charg`e d'Affairs,
a tired, balding man in his forties. "The first
toast requires a second,
Mademoiselle," he said, raising his glass
again, towering over her, "not only prosperity and
long life to the new tai-pan, but to the tai-pan
--your future husband."
  "La, Monsieur!" She put down her
glass, pretending to be cross, "I told you that
in confidence because I'm so happy, so proud, but it
must not be mentioned out loud, until he,
Monsieur Struan makes it public. You must
promise me."
  "Of course, of course." Vervene's tone was
reassuring but he had already mentally drafted the
dispatch he would rush to Seratard aboard their
flagship at Yedo the moment she left.
Clearly there were innumerable political
ramifications and opportunities that such a
liaison would create for France and French
interests. My God, he was thinking, if we're
clever and we are, we can control the Noble House
through this young strumpet with nothing to recommend her
except a fairly pretty face, delectable
breasts, an overripe maidenhead and buttocks
that promise her husband a wanton vigor for a
month or two. How the devil did she snare
him--if what she says is really true. If it
is ...
  Merde, the poor man must be insane
to settle for this baggage, with no dowry and
disreputable lineage, to be the mother of his children! What
incredible luck for that odious swine, Richaud,
now he'll be able to redeem his paper. "My
sincerest congratulations, Mademoiselle."
  His door swung open and the Legation Number
One Boy, an elderly, rotund Chinese
dressed in linen coat, black trousers and
black skullcap and ladened with mail barged in.
"Heya, Mass'r, all same mail-ah, never
mind!" He plonked the letters and packages on the
ornate desk, gawked at the girl, and belched
as he left.
  "My God, these foul-mannered people are enough
to drive one mad! A thousand times I've told
that cretin to knock first! Excuse me a moment."
Quickly Vervene leafed through the letters.
Two from his wife, one from his mistress, all
postmarked two and a half months ago: Both
asking for money, I'll wager, he thought sourly.
"Ah, four letters for you, More'selle." Many
nationals sent their mail in care of their nearest
Legation. "Three from Paris and one from Hong
Kong."
  "Oh, oh thank you!" She brightened seeing that
two were from Colette, one from her aunt, the last
from her father. "We're such a long way from home,
no?"
  "Paris is the world, yes yes it is. Well,
I expect you'll want some privacy, you can
use the room across the hall. If you'll excuse
me ..." Vervene motioned at his heaped desk, his
smile self-deprecating, "affairs of
State."
  "Of course, thank you. And thank you for your good
wishes, but please, not a word. ..." She
swept out graciously knowing that within hours her
marvelous secret would be common knowledge, whispered from
ear to ear. Is that wise? I think so, Malcolm
did ask me, didn't he?
  Vervene opened his letters, scanned them, quickly
saw they both asked for money but no other bad
news, at once put them aside to read and enjoy
later and began the dispatch for Seratard--with a
secret copy for Andr`e Poncin--delighted
to be the bearer of good tidings. "Wait a moment,"
he muttered, "perhaps it's like-father-like-daughter and just
the usual exaggeration! Safer to report it as a
few minutes ago Mademoiselle
Angelique whispered in confidence that ... then the
Minister can make up his own mind."
  Across the hall, in a pleasant antechamber that
faced the small garden off the High Street she
had settled herself expectantly. Colette's
first letter gave her happy news of Paris and
fashion and affairs and their mutual friends so
delightfully that she raced through it knowing she would
reread them many times, particularly tonight in the comfort
of her bed when she could savor everything. She had
known and loved Colette most of her life--at
the convent they had been inseparable, sharing hopes and
dreams and intimacies.
  The second letter gave more exuberant news,
ending about her marriage--Colette was her own
age, eighteen, already married a year with one son:
I am pregnant again, dearest Angelique,
my husband is delighted but I am a
little fretful. As you know the first was not easy though the
Doctor assures me I will be strong enough.
When will you return, I cannot wait ...
  Angelique took a deep breath and looked
out of the window and waited until the twinge had
passed. You must not leave yourself open, she repeated
to herself, near tears. Even with Colette. Be
strong, Angelique. Be careful. Your life
has changed, everything changed--yes but only for a
little while. Do not be caught unawares.
  Again a deep breath. The next letter shocked
her. Aunt Emma wrote the awful news of her
husband's fall and: now we are destitute and
my poor poor Michel languishes in
Debtor's Prison with no help in sight!
We've nowhere to turn, no money. It's
terrible, my child, a nightmare ...
  Poor darling Uncle Michel, she thought,
weeping silently, a shame he was such a bad
manager. "Never mind, dear darling
Aunt-Mama," she said aloud, filled with a
sudden joy. "Now I can repay all your
kindnesses, I'll ask Malcolm to help,
he'll certainly ..."
  Wait! Would that be wise?
  While she pondered that she opened her father's
letter. To her surprise the envelope contained only
a letter, without the expected sight draft she had
asked for, on money brought with her from Paris and
deposited in the Victoria Bank, money that
her uncle had generously advanced to her--on the
solemn promise that she must not tell his wife and
that her father would instantly repay the loan the moment
she reached Hong Kong, which he told her he had
done.

  Hong Kong, September 10. Hello
my little cabbage, I hope that all is well and
your Malcolm idolizes you as I do, as the
whole of Hong Kong does. It's rumored his
father is at death's door. I will keep you
advised. Meanwhile I write in haste as I
leave for Macao on the tide. There's a
wonderful business opportunity there, so good that
I have temporarily pledged the money instruments you
left in safekeeping and will invest for you as an
equal partner. By the next post I will be able
to send you ten times what you wanted and tell you
the wonderful profit we have made--after all, we
have to think of your dowry, without which ...
eh?

  Her eyes could not read on, her brain in
turmoil. Oh my God! What business
opportunity? Is he gambling all that I have in
the world?

  It was nearly two o'clock and McFay was weary,
his stomach empty, his mind filled with gloom.
He had written a dozen letters, signed half a
hundred chits, paid dozens of bills, checked the
previous day's books which showed trading was down,
found that all goods ordered from America were either
cancelled, held up or offered at increased
prices, all business with Canada and Europe
equally affected in some degree by the American
civil war. No good news either in any dispatches
from Hong Kong--a lot of bad from their branch in
Shanghai, though Albert MacStruan, the power
there, was doing a sterling job. My God, he
thought, it'd be a catastrophe if we have
to evacuate Shanghai, with all our investments
there.
  The city was again in turmoil and the three foreign
concessions under British, French and American
control beset with rumors that armies of rebel
irregulars of the immense Tai'ping
Rebellion, based in and around Nanking--a
major city southwards they had captured nine
years ago and used as a capital--were again on
the move. The clipping from the Shanghai
Observer read:

Two years ago when our valiant force of
British and French troops, ably assisted by the
local mercenary army, organized and paid for by our
merchant princes, both European and Chinese,
under the command of the gallant American soldier of
fortune, Frederick Townsend Ward, drove off
the rebels for a thirty-mile radius, we all
presumed the threat was put away forever.
  Now eyewitnesses report an irresistible
army of half a million rebels, with some
European officers, have massed to come against us, and
another half million will again stab north for
Peking. Their opposing Manchu armies are
unreliable and helpless, their Chinese levies
mutinous, so this time we will not survive. It is
hoped that Her Majesty's Government will
prevail on the Manchu authorities
to appoint Captain Charles Gordon to command of
Mr. Ward's force, grievously wounded in
action, and to the position of overall command of
Manchu training. Your correspondent believes
this will be, as usual, too little too late.
  We need a fully equipped British
Army stationed in China, permanently--nervousness in
India over the recent, dreadful Indian
Mutiny of native sepoys notwithstanding.
Business continues to be disastrous with the price of
silk and tea at an all-time high. Famine
conditions exist in most areas within five hundred
miles ...

  More depressing news from home. Monumental
rains had washed out the harvest and famine was
expected in Ireland and other areas--though not like the
Great Potato Famine when hundreds of thousands
died. Vast unemployment in Scotland.
Destitution in Lancashire with most cotton
spinning mills silent, including three owned
by Struan's, because of the Union embargo on
Southern cotton and blockade of all Southern
ports. With Southern cotton England had
supplied cloth to the world. A Struan clipper
ship crammed with teas, silks and lacquer inbound
London had been lost. In the stock market
Struan's was down badly, Brock's up with the
successful arrival of the first of the season's teas.
  Another letter from his fianc@ee of five years,
Maureen Ross, more bad: ... when am I
to arrive? Have you sent the ticket? You promised
this Christmas would be the last to be apart ...
  "It can't be this Christmas, lassie," he
murmured with a scowl, much as he liked her, "can't
afford it yet and, this isn't the place for a young
lady."
  How many times had he written and told her,
knowing that really Maureen and her parents wanted him
to work for Struan's in England or Scotland or
better still to leave "that infamous company and work at
home like a normal man," knowing that really he
wanted her to break off the engagement and to forget
him, knowing that most British wives soon hated
Asia, loathed Asians, abominated the
Pleasure Girls, raged against their ready
access, despised the food, moaned for
"home" and family, making their husband's
lives a permanent misery.
  Knowing, too, that he enjoyed Asia,
loved his work, adored the freedom, treasured their
Yoshiwara and would never happily go home.
Well, he thought, not until I retire.
  The only good in the mail were the books from
Hatchard's in Piccadilly: a new
illustrated edition of Darwin's explosive
On the Origin of Species, some
Tennyson poems, a newly translated
pamphlet by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels
called the Communist Manifesto, five copies
of Punch, but most important of all another
edition of All the Year Round. This was the
weekly started by Charles Dickens, and contained the
fourteenth installment of Great Expectations--
to be published in twenty parts.
  In spite of all that he had had to do,
McFay, like everyone else who had received a
copy, locked the door and consumed the installment
rapaciously. When he read the last sentence,
"to be continued next week," he sighed.
"What the devil will Miss Havisham do next,
evil old bitch? Reminds me of Maureen's
mother. Hope to God it all works out for Pip.
Somehow or other it has to! Hope to God good
old Dickens gives us a happy ending ..."
  For a moment he was bemused, lost in admiration
of the man and his marvelous range of stories, from the
Oliver Twist more than twenty years ago,
through Nicholas Nickleby, David
Copperfield and a dozen others to the riveting
Tale of Two Cities. Dickens is the
greatest writer in the world, no doubt about it.
  He got up and stood at the window, watching the
sea and sending good thoughts to the fleet at Yedo and
to the mail ship that need not now be diverted but would
continue on her regular route to Shanghai instead
of direct Hong Kong with Malcolm Struan,
worrying about him and the future that somehow quickly
became mixed up with Pip and Miss Havisham,
wondering how Pip would extract himself from the mess
he was in and would the girl fall in love with him.
Hope so, poor lass. What about my lassie,
Maureen? It's time I had a family ...
  A knock. "Mr. McFay. May I see
you a moment?" It was Piero Vargas, his
assistant.
  "Just a moment." Feeling a little guilty he
put the copy under the pile, stretched and opened the
door.
  Piero Vargas was a handsome,
middle-aged Eurasian from Macao, the tiny
Portuguese enclave, forty-odd miles west
of Hong Kong, set like a pimple on a slip
of Mainland China and occupied since 1552.
Unlike the British, the Portuguese
considered Macao equal to the mother country and not a
colony, encouraged their settlers to intermarry with
Chinese, accepted Eurasian offspring as
nationals, allowing them permanent access
to Portugal. British intermarriage was greatly
discouraged, though many had families. Their
offspring, however, were not accepted in Society.
By custom those born in Shanghai took their
father's name, in Hong Kong their mother's.
  Ever since the British came to China, they had
contentedly employed the brightest Macaoans as
shroffs--money changers--and compradores, who, of
necessity, spoke English as well as
dialects of Chinese. Except the Noble
House. Their compradore was the enormously
wealthy Gordon Chen, the illegitimate son
of their founder, Dirk Struan, by one of his many
mistresses, though not the last, the fabled
May-may.
  "Yes, Piero?"
  "Sorry to interrupt, senhor," Piero said,
his English liquid and sweet-sounding.
"Kinu-san, our silk supplier, asks for a
personal interview with you."
  "Oh, why?"
  "Well, it's not really for him but for two
buyers who arrived with him. From Choshu."
  "Oh?" McFay's interest picked up.
Almost two years of tentative probes from the
daimyo of Choshu, the fief far to the west on the
Straits of Shimonoseki, had produced some very
important business last year, authorized
by Head Office in Hong Kong and arranged by them:
a 200-ton paddle steamer with a very private
cargo: cannon, shot and ammunition. Paid for
promptly in gold and silver, half in advance,
half on delivery. "Bring them in. Wait,
better I see them in the main reception room."
  "S@i, senhor."
  "Is one of them the same fellow as last time?"
  "Senhor?"
  "The young samurai who spoke a little
English?"
  "I did not take part in the discussion, senhor,
I was on leave in Portugal."
  "Ah yes, now I remember."
  The reception room was big, seating for
forty-two at the oak table. Matching sideboards
and tallboys for silver plate and glass
fronted display cases, gleaming and well kept,
some with arms. He opened one of them, took out a
belt and holstered pistol attached. He buckled
the belt around his waist, making sure the pistol was
loaded and loose in the holster. It was always his
custom when meeting samurai to be as armed as they
were. "A matter of face," he told his
subordinates, "as well as safety." As a
further prop he leaned the Spencer rifle against
a chair, and stood by the window, facing the door.
  Vargas came back with three men. One was
middle-aged, fat, unctuous and swordless,
Kinu, their silk supplier. The other two were
samurai, one young the other in his forties though it was
difficult to tell. Both short, spare,
hard-faced and armed as usual.
  They bowed politely. McFay noted that both
men had instantly seen the breech-loader. He
returned the bow in kind. "Ohayo," he said.
Good morning. Then, "Dozo"--please--
indicating the chairs opposite him, a safe
distance away.
  "Goo'd morning," the younger said without a
smile.
  "Ah, you speak English? Excellent.
Please sit down."
  "Speak 'ritt're," the youth said--the l's
sounding like r's because there was no l sound in
Japanese, v's being equally awkward. For a
moment he spoke to Vargas in Fukenese, their
common Chinese dialect, then the two men
introduced themselves, adding they had been sent by Lord
Ogama of Choshu.
  "I am Jamie McFay, chief of Struan
and Company in Nippon and am honored to see
you." Again Vargas translated. Patiently
Jamie went through the obligatory fifteen
minutes of enquires after their daimyo's health,
their own health, his health and that of the Queen, the
outlook in Choshu, in England, nothing particular,
everything bland. Tea was served and admired. At
length the young man came to the point.
  With great care Vargas kept the excitement out
of his own voice. "They want to buy a thousand
breech-loaders with a thousand bronze cartridges
per gun. We are to name a fair price
and deliver within three months. If within two
months, they will pay a bonus--twenty percent."
  Outwardly, McFay was equally calm. "Is
that all they wish to buy at the moment?"
  Vargas asked them. "Yes, senhor, but they
require a thousand rounds per rifle. And a
steamship of small size."
  McFay was counting the huge potential
profit, but more so he was remembering his conversation with
Greyforth, and the well-known hostility of the
Admiral and General, supported by Sir
William, to any sale of any armaments.
Remembering the various murders. And
Canterbury hacked to pieces. And that he himself
did not approve of the sale of armaments, not
until it was safe. Would it ever be safe with such a
warlike people? "Please tell them I can give them
an answer in three weeks." He saw the
pleasant smile vanish from the younger man's
face.
  "Answer ... now. No three week."
  "Not have guns here," McFay said slowly,
directly to him. "Must write Hong Kong,
Head Office, nine days there, nine days back.
Some breech-loaders there. All rest in
America. Four or five months minimum."
  "No unner'stand."
  Vargas interpreted. Then there was a conversation
between the two samurai, the merchant answering their
questions with fervent humility. More questions to Vargas,
politely responded to. "He says very
well, he or a Choshu official will return in
twenty-nine days. This transaction is to be
secret."
  "Of course." McFay looked at the youth.
"Secret."
  "Hai! Sek'ret."
  "Ask him how the other samurai, Saito,
is." He saw them frown, but could read nothing from
their faces.
  "They don't know him personally, Senhor."
  More bows and then Jamie was alone. Lost in
thought, he put the gun belt back into the case.
If I don't sell them the guns, Norbert
will--whatever the morality.
  Vargas returned, very pleased. "An
excellent possibility, senhor, but a big
responsibility."
  "Yes. I wonder what Head Office will
say, this time."
  "Easy to find out, senhor, quickly. You don't
have to wait eighteen days, isn't Head Office
upstairs?"
  McFay stared at him. "I'll be damned,
I'd forgotten! Difficult to think of young
Malcolm as tai-pan, our ultimate
decider. You're right."
  Running feet approached, the door opened,
"Sorry to butt in," Nettlesmith said,
puffing from his exertion, his grubby top hat askew.
"Thought you'd better know, just got word the blue
signal flag went up the Legation mast a few
minutes ago ... then came down and went up again
then came down to half mast and stayed there."
  Jamie gaped at him. "What the devil
does that mean?"
  "Don't know, 'cepting that half mast usually
means a death, doesn't it?"

  Greatly perturbed, the Admiral again trained
his binoculars on the Legation flagpole, the other
men on the quarterdeck, his Captains from the rest
of the fleet, Marlowe, the General, French
Admiral, and von Heimrich equally concerned,
Seratard and Andr`e Poncin pretending to be.
When the lookout had given the alarm half an
hour ago, they had all hurried on deck from the
lunch table. Except the Russian Minister:
"If you want to wait in the cold, very well,
damned if I am. When word comes from the shore,
yes, no or war, please wake me. If you
start shelling I'll join you ..."
  Marlowe was watching the roll over the
Admiral's collar, despising him, wishing he
was ashore with Tyrer, or aboard his own ship, the
Pearl. At noon the Admiral had replaced
the temporary captain with a stranger, a
Lieutenant Dornfild, disregarding his
advice. Bloody old bastard, look at the
way he fiddles so bloody pompously with his
binoculars--we all know they are highly
expensive and issued to Flag Rank only.
Bloody old--
  "Marlowe!"
  "Yessir."
  "We'd better find out what the devil's going
on. You go ashore ... no, I need you here!
Thomas, would you please be good enough to send an
officer to the Legation? Marlowe, detail a
signalman to go with the detachment."
  At once the General jerked his thumb at his
aide who hurried off, closely followed
by Marlowe. Seratard pulled his heavy great coat
closer against the chill of the wind. "I'm afraid
Sir William has boxed himself in."
  "I remember you giving your opinion this
morning," the Admiral said curtly.
  The meeting he had called with the Ministers had
been noisy and had brought forth no solution,
except Count Zergeyev's: immediate and massive
force. "Which, my dear Count," he had pointed
out sourly at once, "we don't have now if
it's necessary to follow up a simple bombardment
to seize the city and surrounds."
  Ketterer pursed his lips and glared at
Seratard, the dislike mutual. "I'm sure
Sir William will find an answer, but I
tell you frankly, by God, if I see our
colors struck, Yedo goes up in smoke!"
  "I agree," Seratard said. "A matter of
national honor!"
  Von Heimrich's face hardened.
"Japanners are not stupid--like some people. I cannot
believe they will disregard the force we have now."
  The wind picked up suddenly, crackling some
of the spars aloft, sea greyer, clouds greying.
All eyes went to a black squall line on the
eastern horizon. The squall was heading
shorewards threatening their exposed anchorage.
  "Marlowe, send a ... Marlowe!" the
Admiral bellowed.
  "Yessir?" Marlowe came running.
  "For God's sake stay within hailing distance!
Signal all ships: "Prepare to stand out
to sea. Should conditions deteriorate rapidly,
on my command take individual action and rejoin
at Kanagawa as soon as conditions permit."
You Captains get back to your ships while
you've the weather." They rushed off, glad to be
away.
  "I will get back to my ship too," the French
Admiral said. "Bonjour, messieurs."
  "We'll come with you, Monsieur Admiral,"
Seratard said. "Thank you for your hospitality,
Admiral Ketterer."
  "What about Count Alexi? He came with you,
didn't he?"
  "Let him sleep. Better for the Russian
bear to sleep, n'est-ce pas?" Seratard
said coldly to von Heimrich, both of
them knowing full well Prussia's secret
overtures to the Tsar to remain neutral in any
confrontation, to allow Prussia to expand in
Europe to satisfy an open state policy: the
creation of a German nation of German-speaking
peoples with Prussia its spearhead.
  Marlowe, hurrying for the signalman, saw his
ship, the Pearl, neatly at anchor and was
worried about her, loathing not being aboard and in
command. Uneasily he glanced seaward again,
gauging the squall line, the weight of blackening
clouds, the smell and the taste of the salt on the
wind. "That bugger's going to be a sod."

  In the Legation audience room Sir
William, flanked by a Scots officer,
Phillip Tyrer and guards sat coldly facing
three Japanese officials who were leisurely
seating themselves, their guards behind them: the
grey-haired Elder, Adachi, daimyo of
Mito, the mock samurai, Misamoto the
fisherman, and last, a short, big-bellied,
Bakufu official, secretly fluent in
Dutch, whose covert assignment was to report in
private to Yoshi on the meeting and the behavior
of the other two. As usual, none had used their
correct names.
  Five palanquins had arrived as yesterday,
with the same ceremony though an increased number of
guards. Only three were occupied which Sir
William had found curiously disturbing. This,
added to heightened samurai activity during the
night around the temple and Legation, prompted him
to send a partial alarm signal to the fleet
by half-masting the pennant that he hoped Ketterer
would understand.
  Outside in the forecourt, Hiraga, again
disguised as a gardener, had been equally perturbed
--even more so that Toranaga Yoshi was not amongst
the officials. This meant the attack plan so
carefully poised to ambush Yoshi near the castle
gates on his return had to be called off. At
once he had tried to melt away, but samurai
irritably ordered him back to work. Seething,
he obeyed, waiting his chance to escape.
  "You're two and a half hours late," Sir
William said icily as an opening salvo.
"In civilized countries diplomatic
meetings are on time, not late!"
  Immediate and flowery apologies of no
consequence. Then the usual obligatory
introductions and sugary compliments and aggravating
politenesses, and over an hour of back and forth,
of demands calmly deflected, ponderous
arguments, delays requested, astonishment where
none was merited, questions needing to be repeated,
facts dismissed, the truth disregarded--alibis,
explanations, rationalizations, excuses, all
courteously delivered.
  Sir William was about to explode when, with
great formality, the Elder, Adachi, produced a
sealed scroll, handed it to their interpreter who handed
it to Johann.
  Johann's own weariness dropped away.
"Gott im Himmel! It's under the seal of the
roju."
  "Eh?"
  "The Council of Elders. I'd recognize
the seal anywhere--it's the same as Ambassador
Harris got. You better accept it, formally,
Sir William, then I'll read it aloud if
it's in Dutch which I doubt." He stifled a
nervous yawn. "Probably just another delaying
tactic."
  Sir William did as Johann suggested,
hating to be so confined and having to rely on foreign
mercenary interpreters.
  Johann broke the seal and scanned the
document. His astonishment was open: "It's in
Dutch by God! Skipping all the titles,
formal language etc., it says: The
Council of Elders, having received what appears
to be a just complaint, apologizes for the, for the
dereliction of its subjects and wishes to invite
the honored Minister of the British and other
accredited Ministers to meet the Council thirty
days from now, in Yedo, when the formal complaint will be
presented, the matter discussed, acted upon, and an
indemnity for said just complaint agreed. Signed
... Nori Anjo, Chief Minister."
  With a supreme effort, Sir William kept
his erupting relief bottled. This unbelievable
reprieve gave him the face-saver he
desperately needed, and now if he could finesse
them just a little further ... To his sudden fury, out
of the corner of his eye, he noticed Tyrer
smiling broadly. Without looking at him he
hissed, "Stop smiling you bloody idiot," and
in the same breath added harshly, "Johann,
tell them they will have my reply in three
days. Meanwhile I want an immediate indemnity,
in gold, in three days, for ten thousand pounds
sterling for the families of the Sergeant and
Corporal murdered in this Legation, last year,
and already demanded four times!"
  When this was translated, he saw consternation on
the face of the elderly man. Another lengthy
conversation between him and the Bakufu official.
  Johann reported wearily, "The old
fellow dismisses this with their usual: but that
"unfortunate occurrence" was by a Legation staff
employee who then committed seppuku--
suicide. It's not the Bakufu's fault at
all."
  Equally tiredly, Sir William said,
"Give them back the usual, by God: that they
appointed him, they insisted we employ him, so
they are responsible--and he only committed
suicide because he was badly wounded in the murder
attempt on my predecessor and liable for immediate
capture!" Trying to push away his tiredness, he
watched the two officials talking with their
interpreter, and the third man listening as he had
done all afternoon. Perhaps he's the one with real power.
What happened to the other men from yesterday,
particularly the younger man--the one Andr`e Poncin
accosted as he left. What is that devious
bastard Seratard up to?
  The freshening wind caught a loose shutter and
jolted it against the window. One of the sentries
leaned over the lintel and hooked it back in
place. Not far offshore was the fleet, the ocean
a deep grey now and whitecapped. Sir
William noticed the looming squall line. His
anxiety for the ships increased.
  Johann said, "The old fellow asks, will you
accept three thousand."
  Sir William's face went red. "Ten
thousand in gold!"
  More talk then Johann mopped his brow.
"Mein Gott, ten it is, to be paid in two
installments at Yokohama, ten days from now, the
balance the day before the Yedo meeting."
  After a deliberately dramatic pause,
Sir William said, "I will give them my
answer in three days if it's acceptable."
  Much sucking in of breath, a few more wily
attempts to change the three days to thirty,
to ten, to eight all of which were stonewalled and
refused. "Three."
  Polite bows and the Delegation was gone.
  Once they were alone, Johann beamed. "That's
the first time we made any progress, Sir
William, the very first time!"
  "Yes, well, we'll see. Just don't
understand them at all. Obviously they were trying
to wear us down. But why? What's the good of that?
They already had the scroll so why the devil
didn't they hand it over in the beginning and have done with
all their cursed time wasting? Bunch of bloody
idiots! And why send two empty
palanquins."
  Phillip Tyrer said brightly, "Seems
to me, sir, that's just one of their characteristics. To be
devious."
  "Yes, well, Tyrer, come with me please."
He led the way to his private office and when the
door was closed he said angrily, "Didn't the
F.o. teach you anything? Are you totally without
brains? Don't you have enough sense to have a poker
face at diplomatic meetings? Are your
brains addled?"
  Tyrer was in shock at the venom. "Sorry
sir very sorry sir I was just so pleased at your
victory I cou--"
  "It wasn't a victory, you idiot! It was
just a delay, albeit heaven sent!" Sir
William's relief that the meeting was over and
had, against his expectations, achieved much more than
he could have wished for, fuelled his irritability.
"Are your ears filled with mildew? Didn't you
hear the "what appears to be a just complaint"--
that's the biggest hole they could ever leave, by God!
We achieved a delay, that's all, but it
happens to suit me perfectly and if the Yedo
meeting takes place in thirty days I'll be
astounded. The next time DON'T let your
feelings show, for God's sake, and if you ever
become an interpreter ... you just better learn
Japanese quickly or you'll be on the next
boat home with a note on your record that will get
you a posting to Esquimoland for the rest of your
life!"
  "Yes sir."
  Still steaming, Sir William saw the young man
staring at him stoically and wondered what was different
about him. Then he noticed his eyes.
  Where have I seen that look before--the same, almost
indefinable strangeness that young Struan also had?
Ah yes, of course, now I
remember! In the eyes of the young soldiers coming
back from the Crimea, the untouched as well as the
wounded--allied or enemy. War had torn the youth
out of them, torn out their innocence with such obscene
speed that forever after they were changed. And it always shows
not in their faces but in their eyes. How many times was
I told: before the battle a youth, a few
minutes or hours later, adult--British,
Russian, German, French, or Turk the
same.
  I'm the idiot, not this young chap. I'd
forgotten he's hardly twenty-one and in six days
he's almost been murdered and been through as violent
an experience as any man can have. Or woman,
by Heaven! That's right, there was the same look in the
girl's eyes too. Stupid of me not to realize
it. Poor girl, isn't she barely eighteen?
Terrible to grow up so fast. I've been so
lucky.
  "Well, Mr. Tyrer," he said gruffly,
envying him--that he had come through his baptism of
fire bravely, "I'm sure you'll be all
right. These meetings are, well, enough to try the
patience of Job, eh? I think a sherry is in
order."

  Hiraga had had great difficulty escaping from
the garden through the circles of samurai, and sneaking
back to the Inn of the Forty-seven Ronin. When he
reached it, long overdue, he was shocked to discover
the assassination party had already left for the ambush.
  Ori said helplessly, "One of our people
reported that the Delegation had come out of the castle
exactly as yesterday, banners as yesterday, that
there were five palanquins as yesterday, so we
presumed Lord Yoshi would be in one."
  "Everyone was supposed to wait."
  "They did, Hiraga, but if ... if they
hadn't left when they did they would never be in
place in time."
  Rapidly Hiraga changed into a cheap
kimono and collected his weapons. "Did you
see the doctor?"
  "We, the mama-san and I, we thought it too
dangerous today. Tomorrow will be fine."
  "I'll see you in Kanagawa then."
  "Sonno-joi!"
  "Go to Kanagawa! Here you're a hazard!"
  Hiraga slipped over the fence and went by back
alleys and little-used paths and bridges,
circling for the Castle. This time he was lucky and
avoided all patrols.
  Most of the daimyo palaces outside the
castle walls were deserted. Using cover well,
he picked his way from garden to garden until he
reached the burnt-out wreckage of what had been the
daimyo's palace destroyed during the
earthquake three days ago. As planned, his
shishi friends were gathered for the ambush near the broken
main gate that fronted the main pathway to the
castle gate. There were nine of them, not eleven.
  "Eeee, Hiraga, we'd given you up!" the
youngest, the most excited, whispered. "From here
we'll kill him easily."
  "Where are the Mori samurai?"
  "Dead." His cousin, Akimoto, shrugged.
He was the oldest amongst them, a burly
twenty-four. "We came by separate ways but
I was near them and the three of us ran into a
patrol." He beamed. "I fled one way, they
another, I saw one take an arrow and go down.
I never knew I could run so fast, forget them,
when will Yoshi pass by?"
  Their disappointment was vast when Hiraga told
them their prey was not in the cortege. "Then what shall
we do?" a tall, very handsome youth of sixteen
asked. "This ambush is perfect--half a dozen
important Bakufu palanquins have gone by with
hardly a guard around them."
  "This place is too good to risk for no
special reason," Hiraga said. "We'll
leave one at a time. Akimoto, you firs--"
  The shishi on guard whistled a warning.
Instantly, they went deeper into cover, eyes
pressed to openings in the broken fences. An
ornate, covered palanquin with eight
half-naked bearers and a dozen samurai banner
guards was thirty-odd yards away, heading
leisurely for the castle gate. No one else was
in sight, either way.
  Instant recognition of the emblem: Nori
Anjo, head of the Council of Elders. Instant
decision, "Sonno-joi!"
  With Hiraga in the lead they rushed as one man
to the attack, slaughtered the front two ranks
of guards and hurtled for the palanquin. But in their
excitement they had misjudged by a few seconds
and that allowed the remaining eight guards,
hand-picked warriors, to recover. In the
frantic melee, the bearers squealed with
fright, dropped their poles and fled--those who
escaped the first violent onslaught--and this gave
Anjo the moment he needed to slide the
palanquin's far door open and roll out as
Hiraga's sword went through the soft wood
to impale the cushion where he had been a second
before.
  Cursing, Hiraga jerked the sword out,
whirled in defense as he was menaced from the back,
killed the man after a searing clash of swords,
then leaped over the poles for Anjo who had
scrambled to his feet, his sword out and now
covered by three guards. Behind Hiraga, five of
his friends were duelling with the other four samurai, one
shishi was already dead, one helpless on the ground
mortally wounded and another, screaming with
bloodlust, misjudging his adversary, slipped
on the body of a sobbing bearer, and took a terrible
cut in his side. Before his assailant could
recover, a shishi slashed at the guard with total
ferocity and the samurai's head rolled in the dust.
  Now it was seven against six.
  At once Akimoto broke off his fight and
rushed to support Hiraga who had hurled himself
at Anjo and his three guards and was being
overwhelmed. Feinting brilliantly, Hiraga
forced one of the guards off balance and impaled him,
withdrew and darted to one side to draw off the other
two, giving Akimoto the opening he needed
to dispatch Anjo.
  At that moment there was a warning shout. Twenty
castle guards had rounded the corner fifty yards
away and were charging to Anjo's support. The
barest hesitation from Akimoto gave a guard time
to parry the ferocious blow that would have killed
Anjo, allowing him to scramble and flee towards the
reinforcements. Now the shishi were completely
outnumbered.
  No way to get Anjo! No way
to overcome!
  "Retreat!" Hiraga shouted and, again as one
man, the maneuver rehearsed many times,
Akimoto and the remaining four broke off their
duels and charged back through the damaged main
gate, Hiraga last--the badly wounded youth,
Jozan, hobbling after them. Momentarily the guards
were thrown into confusion. Then they collected themselves
and, heavily reinforced, hurtled in pursuit
while others intercepted Jozan, at bay,
sword high, reeling, blood pouring from
his side.
  Akimoto was leading the pell-mell retreat
through the damaged castle, their line of pullback
already well reconnoitered. Hiraga was
rearguard, the enemy gaining on him. He waited
until he reached the first barricade where Gota
waited in ambush to support him, stopped
suddenly and the two of them whirled to counterattack,
chopping and hacking viciously, mortally wounding one
man, forcing the next to fall and bring down another.
Instantly they fled again, leading the enemy deeper
into the maze.
  Almost stumbling, then rushing through the next narrow
gap in the half-burnt wall where Akimoto and
another waited in a second ambush. Without
hesitation these two cut down the first of the
attackers, screaming "Sonno-joi" while the
remainder, stunned by the suddenness of the assault,
halted to regroup. When they gave their battle
cry and jumped over the body of their comrade through the
bottleneck, Akimoto, Hiraga, and the others
were nowhere to be seen.
  At once the samurai fanned out and began a
meticulous search, the sky filled with nimbus
clouds and menacing.
  In front of the burnt-out main gate, Anjo
was now surrounded by guards. Five of his men had
been killed, two were badly wounded. The two
dead shishi had already been beheaded. The young shishi
was helpless on the ground, one leg almost severed and
he was holding on to it in agony, trying to stick it
back together. Jozan was huddled against a wall.
Rain began.
  The samurai standing over the youth said again, "Who
are you? What's your name, who sent you, who's your
leader?"
  "I've told you, shishi from Choshu, Toma
Hojo! I was leader! No one sent me.
Sonno-joi!"
  "He's lying, Sire," a panting officer
said.
  "Of course," Anjo said, seething. "Kill
him."
  "Respectfully request he's allowed
to commit seppuku."
  "Kill him!"
  The officer, a big, bearlike man, shrugged
and went over to the youth. With his back to the Elder,
he whispered, "I have the honor to act as your
second. Stretch your neck." His
sword sang in the air as he dealt the single
blow. Formally he lifted the head by its topknot,
presenting it to Anjo.
  "I have seen it," Anjo said, following
correct ritual, at the same time choked with
rage that these men had dared to attack him, dared
to frighten him half to death, him, Chief of the
roju! "Now that one--he's a liar too, kill
him!"
  "Respectfully request he be allowed
to commit seppuku."
  Anjo was about to rave at him to kill the
attempted assassin brutally or commit
seppuku himself when he sensed the sudden
collective antagonism of the samurai around
him. The usual fear permeated him: whom do I
trust? Only five of these men were his personal
guards.
  He pretended to consider the request. When his
fury was contained, he nodded, turned and stomped
off towards the castle gates in the increasing rain.
His men went with him. The remainder circled
Jozan.
  "You can rest a moment, shishi," the officer said
kindly, wiping the rain from his own face. "Give
him some water."
  "Thank you." Jozan had prepared for this moment
ever since, with Ori and Shorin and others four
years ago, he had sworn to "Honor the
Emperor and expel the foreigners." Summoning
his waning strength, he groped to his knees, and was
horrified to realize he was petrified of dying.
  The officer had seen the terror, had expected
it and quickly came forward and squatted beside him:
"Do you have a death poem, shishi? Tell it to me,
hold on, do not give way, you are samurai and
this is as good a day as any," he said softly,
encouraging the youth, willing the tears to stop. "From
nothing into nothing, one sword cuts your enemy, one
sword cuts you. Shout your battle cry and you will
live forever. Say it: Sonno-joi ... again
..."
  All the time he had been preparing himself. With a
sudden fluid movement, he stood erect and
whirled his sword from the sheath--and the youth
into eternity.
  "Eeee," one of his men said with admiration.
"Uraga-san, that was marvelous to see."
  "Sensei Katsumata of Satsuma was one of
my teachers," he said throatily, his
heart pounding like never before, but pleased that he had
performed his duty as a samurai correctly.
One of his men picked up the head by its topknot.
The rain became tears, washing away the real
ones. "Clean the head and take it to Lord Anjo
for viewing." Uraga glanced at the castle
gates. "Cowards disgust me," he said and walked
away.

  That night, when it was safe, Hiraga and the
others sneaked out of the cellar that had been located
in advance. By different routes they slipped away
for their safe house.
  It was overcast and black, wind strong with
spattering rain. I will not feel cold, I will not
show discomfort, I am samurai, Hiraga
ordered himself, following the pattern of training in his
family ever since he could remember. Just as I
will train my sons and daughters--if my karma
is to have sons and daughters, he thought.
  "It's time you married," his father had said a
year ago.
  "I agree, Father. I respectfully
request you change your mind and allow me to marry
my choice."
  "First, it is the duty of the son to obey the
father, second it is the father's duty to choose the
wives of his sons and husbands of his daughters,
third, Sumomo's father does not approve, she
is Satsuma and not Choshu and last, however
desirable she is not suitable. What about the Ito
girl?"'
  "Please excuse me, father, I agree my
choice is not perfect but her family is
samurai, she is samurai trained and I am
possessed by her. I beg you. You have four other
sons--I have only one life and we, you and I,
we both agree it is to be devoted
to sonno-joi and will therefore be short. Grant this
to me as a lifetime wish." By custom such a wish
was a most serious request and meant that, if
granted, it precluded asking for any other, ever.
  "Very well," his father had said gruffly. "But
not as a lifetime wish. You may be affianced when
she is seventeen. I will welcome her into our
family."
  That was last year. A few days later he had
left Shimonoseki, supposedly to join the
Choshu regiment in Ky@oto, actually to declare for
sonno-joi and become ronin--and put
his secret four-year adherence and training to use.
  Now it was Ninth Month. In three weeks
Sumomo became seventeen but now he was so far
outside the law there was no chance of safe
return. Until yesterday. His father had
written: Astonishingly, our Lord Ogama
has offered a pardon to all warriors who openly
embraced sonno-joi and will restore all
stipends if they return at once, renounce the
heresy and again swear allegiance to him publicly.
You will take advantage of this offer. Many are
returning.
  The letter had saddened him, almost destroying his
resolve. "Sonno-joi is more important
than family or even Lord Ogama, even
Sumomo," he had told himself over and over.
"Lord Ogama cannot be trusted. As to my stipend
..."
  Fortunately his father was relatively well off
compared with most, and, because of his shoya grandfather, had
been promoted to hirazamurai, the third rank
of samurai. Above were senior samurai,
hatomoto and daimyo. Below hirazamurai were
all others--goshi, ashigaru, rural
samurai, and foot soldiers, who were of the
feudal class but below samurai. As such his father
had had access to lower officials and the education of his
sons was the best available.
  I owe him everything, Hiraga thought.
  Yes, and obediently I worked to become the best
pupil in the Samurai School, the best
swordsman, the best at English. And I have his
permission and approval and that of the Sensei, our
chief teacher, to embrace sonno-joi, to become
ronin, to lead and organize Choshu warriors as
a spearhead for change. Yes, but their approval
is secret, for if known, surely it would cost
my father and the Sensei their heads.
  Karma. I am doing my duty. Gai-jin are
scum we do not need. Only their weapons to kill
them with.
  The rain increased. And the tempest. This pleased
him for it made interception less likely. The
beckoning bath and sak`e and clean clothes kept
him warm and strong. That the attack had failed
did not concern him. That was karma.
  Ground into him by his teachers and heritage was the
certainty that enemies and traitors were everywhere
until it was a way of life. His steps were
measured, he made sure he was not being
followed, changed direction without logic and,
whenever possible, explored ahead before moving.
  When he reached the alley his strength drained out
of him. The Inn of the Forty-seven Ronin and its
surrounding fence had vanished.
  All that remained was emptiness and the reeking
smell and smoking ashes. A few bodies, men
and women. Some decapitated, some hacked
to pieces. He recognized his comrade shishi,
Gota, by his kimono. The mama-san's head
was on a spear thrust into the ground. Attached was a
sign: It is against the law to harbor
criminals and traitors. The official seal
below was of the Bakufu, signed by Nori Anjo,
chief of the roju.
  Hiraga was filled with surging fury but it was
icy and merely added more layers to that already within. Those
cursed gai-jin, he thought. It is their fault.
Because of them this happened. We will be revenged.

                 

    Sunday, 28th September:
  Malcolm Struan came out of sleep
slowly. His senses probed, testing. He had
always known much about mental pain, losing two
brothers and a sister; the anguish caused by his
father's drunkenness and ever increasing rages; from
impatient teachers; from his obsessive need
to excel because one day he would be the tai-pan; and
from his nagging fear he would be inadequate however much
he prepared and trained and hoped and prayed and worked
by day and by night, every day and every night of his life--
no real childhood or boyhood like others.
  But now as never before he had to test the level of
his awakening, to plumb the depth of what physical
pain he had to endure today as today's norm,
disregarding the sudden, blinding spasms that arrived
without warning or logic.
  Just a throbbing ache today but better than
yesterday. How many days from the Tokaid@o
Road? Sixteen. Sixteenth day.
  He allowed himself to become more awake. Truly
better than yesterday. Eyes and ears open now.
Room steady in the early light. Clear sky,
light wind, no storm.
  Two days ago the storm had ceased. It had
blown for eight days at typhoon strength, then
vanished as quickly as it had arrived. The fleet
standing off Yedo had scattered the first day
seeking safety at sea. Alone of all the
warships, the French flagship had disengaged
early, just making it back safely to Yokohama.
No other ships had returned. No need
to worry yet, but everyone watched the horizon
uneasily, hoping and praying.
  During the gales here at Yokohama a
merchantman had been blown ashore, some
buildings damaged, many cutters and fishing boats
lost, havoc wrought in the village and
Yoshiwara, many tents in the military encampment
on the bluff blown away but no casualties
there, or in the Settlement.
  We were more than lucky, Struan thought,
concentrating on the central problem of his
universe. Can I sit up?
  A tentative, awkward attempt.
Ayeeyah! Pain, but not too bad. With both
arms he pushed further and now he was erect, his
hands braced behind him.
  Bearable. Better than yesterday. Waiting a
moment, then leaning forward, carefully taking his
weight off one arm. Still bearable. Weight off
both arms. Still bearable. Taking care he pulled
the bedclothes off and cautiously tried to swing his
legs to the floor. But he could not, the stabbing pain
too great. A second try, again failure.
  Never mind, I'll try later. He lowered
himself as gently as he could. When his weight was off
his waist and on his back he sighed with relief.
"Ayeeyah!"
  "Patience, Malcolm," Babcott had
said every day at every visit--three or four times
daily.
  "Sod patience!"
  "Quite right too--but you really are doing fine."
  "And when can I get up?"'
  "Now if you wish--but I wouldn't advise
it."
  "How long?"'
  "Give it a couple of weeks."
  He had cursed openly but in many ways he was
glad for the reprieve. It gave him more time
to consider how he was going to deal with being tai-pan,
with his mother, with Angelique, with McFay and
pressing business problems.
  "What about the guns for Choshu?"' McFay
had asked a few days ago. "It'll be a
huge continuing business."
  "I've an idea. Leave it with
me."
  "Norbert will have sniffed these Choshus out long
since and he's bound to make them an undercutting
offer."
  "The hell with Norbert and Brock! Their
contacts are not as good as ours, and Dmitri,
Cooper-Tillman and most of the other American
China traders's on our side."
  "Except in Hawaii," McFay said
sourly.
  In the last mail, ten days ago--no further
news since then and the bimonthly steamer not
expected for another five days--Tess Struan
had written: ...

The Victoria Bank has betrayed us. I
believe they have been secretly supporting
Morgan Brock in London with lavish letters of
credit. With these, he has secretly bought out or
bribed all our Hawaiian agents cornering the
whole sugar market, excluding us totally.
Worse, though I've no proof, it's rumoured
he has close contacts with the Rebel
President Jefferson Davis and his cotton
plantation owners, proposing to barter the whole
crop against cotton futures for English mills
--a deal that would make Tyler and Morgan the
richest men in Asia. THIS MUST NOT
HAPPEN! I am at my wit's end. Jamie,
what do you suggest? Give this dispatch to my son
with the same urgent request for help.

  "What's your suggestion, Jamie?"'
  "I don't have one, Mal ...
Tai-pan."
  "If the deal's done the deal's done and that's
the end of it. Say it is, could we intercept the
cotton somehow?"'
  McFay had blinked. "Pirate it?"'
  Struan had said levelly, "If need be.
Old Man Brock would, he has in the past.
That's one possibility, the cotton will all go in
his ships. Second: our Navy breaks the
Union blockade and then we can all get all
the cotton we want."
  "It could, if we declare war on the Union.
Unthinkable!"
  "I don't agree. For God's sake, we
should come in on Davis's side, Southern
cotton's our lifeblood. Then
they'll win, otherwise they won't."
  "Agreed. But we're equally dependent on
the North."
  "How do we take away his ships? There must
be a way to break the chain. If he can't move the
cargo he's bankrupt."
  "What would Dirk do?"'
  "Go for the jugular," Malcolm had replied
at once.
  "Then that's what we have to find ..."
  Where and what is it? he asked himself again, lying
quietly on the bed, willing his brain to work
clearly on this problem and all the others.
Angelique? No, I'll think about her later
--but I know I love her more every day.
  Thank God I can write letters now. Must
write to Mother again, if anyone should know the jugular
it's her, isn't Tyler Brock her father and
Morgan her brother but how dare she sneer at
Angelique's family? Should I write
to Angelique's father? Yes, but not yet, there's
time enough.
  So much other mail to catch up on, books
to order from England, Christmas not so far away, the
Jockey Club Charity Ball in Hong Kong,
Struan's annual Ball to think about, meetings
today: Jamie at least twice, Seratard this afternoon
--what does he want? What else is
planned for today? Phillip's coming to chat again after
breakfast ... wait a minute, no, not today.
Yesterday Sir William ordered him back
to Yedo, to prepare the Legation for the meeting with the
Council of Elders in twenty days.
  "Will the meeting really take place, Sir
William?"' he had asked when the Minister had
visited him. With the fleet no longer protecting
the Legation, and extensive though not overtly
hostile samurai activity all around them, after
a few face-saving days Sir William had
considered it prudent to return to Yokohama,
ostensibly to prepare for the delivery of the indemnity
money.
  "I think so, Mr. Struan. Perhaps not
punctually, but yes the ceremonial will happen
approximately then and we will have taken a real
leap forward. If they produce the first payment of
5,000 pounds as promised ... well, that will be
a very good indication. By the way, I understand you've a
steamer due to leave today for Hong Kong, could I
prevail upon you to allow one of my staff
and some urgent mail to go with her--my wife and two
sons are expected soon and I have to make
plans."
  "Of course, I'll mention it to McFay.
If you want a berth on any of our ships
to meet them just say the word."
  "Thank you--I was planning two weeks
vacation when they do. One gets hidebound, cooped
up here, don't you think? Miss the bustle of
Hong Kong, that's quite a city though damned if the
people at Whitehall appreciate it! Plenty of
good roast beef, some cricket or tennis, the
theatre or opera, and several days at the races
would be most welcome. When will you return?"'
  When?
  News of our Tokaid@o disaster would have arrived
almost a week ago, presuming the mail ship
weathered the storm. Mother will have had a fit though showing
nothing to outsiders. Will she come here on the first
available ship? Possibly, but there's HQ
to look after--and Emma, Rose and Duncan. With
father dead, me not there, eighteen days is too long
for her to be away. Even if she's already aboard
there's at least another three or four days
to prepare my defenses. Strange to consider her
a possible enemy, if not enemy no longer friend.
Perhaps she's friend after all, she always has been,
however distant, always attending father with little time for us.
  "Hello, my son, how could I ever be your
enemy?"'
  He was astonished to see her standing by the bed, his
father also, and this was strange because he remembered his
father was dead but it did not seem to matter, quickly out
of bed without hurt and chatting with them happily in the
cutter crossing Hong Kong harbor, storm
clouds everywhere, both of them listening deferentially
and approving his clever plans, Angelique
sitting in the stern, her dress diaphanous,
breasts beckoning, uncovered now, his hands there and
lower, all uncovered now, her body writhing against
his, hands caressing his face ...
  "Malcolm?"
  He awoke with a start. Angelique was beside the
bed, smiling at him, peignoir blue silk
rich and discreet. The dream vanished, except the
threat and promise of her body, ever pulsating in
his subconscious. "I ... oh I was dreaming,
my darling, but it was about you."
  "Oh yes? What?"
  He frowned, trying to recollect.
"I don't remember," he said, smiling up at
her, "except that you were beautiful. I love your
gown."
  She pirouetted gaily to show it off. "The
tailor you asked Jamie to arrange made it!
Mon Dieu, Malcolm, me, I think he
is marvelous--I ordered four dresses, I
hope that's all right ... oh thank you!" She
bent down to kiss him.
  "Wait, Angelique, wait, just a
second. Look!" Carefully he raised himself,
dominating the pain, took both supporting hands
away and held them out to her.
  "That's wonderful, ch@eri," she said,
delighted, catching his hands. "Ah, Monsieur
Struan, I think I'd better take care to be
chaperoned all the time now, and never be alone with you
in your bedroom."
  Smiling she stepped closer, carefully put
her hands on his shoulders, allowed his arms to go around
her and kissed him. Her kiss was light,
promising and avoided his need for more. Without guile
she kissed his ear, then straightened, allowing his
head to rest against her breast, the intimacy pleasing
her--and him very much. Soft silk there, with that
uncanny, irreplaceable, special warmth.
  "Malcolm, did you really really mean what you
said about wanting to marry me?" She felt his arms
tighten and the wince of pain.
  "Of course, I've told you so many times."
  "Do you think, do you think your parents, pardon,
your mother, she will approve, yes? Oh I do
hope so."
  "Yes, oh yes she will, of course she will."
  "May I write to Papa, I would like to tell
him?"
  "Of course, write when you wish, I will
write too," he said throatily, then, swamped
by her affection, his need overcoming his discretion, he
kissed the silk, then again, harder and almost cursed
aloud as he sensed her retreat before it happened.
"Sorry," he muttered.
  "No need for "Sorry" or any
Anglo-Saxon guilt, my love, not between us,"
she said gently. "I want you too." Then,
following her plan, switched her mood,
entirely in control, her happiness infectious.
"Now I will be the nurse Nightingale."
  She plumped the pillows and began to make the
bed neater. "Tonight is a French dinner
hosted by Monsieur Seratard, tomorrow night he
has arranged a soiree. Andr`e Poncin is
giving a piano recital of Beethoven--I
prefer him so much to Mozart--also Chopin and a
piece by a young man called Brahms." A
church bell began, sounding the call to early
service, almost immediately to be joined by others,
sweeter and more melodious from the Catholic church.
"There," she said, helping him lie back
comfortably. "Now I will go for my toilette and
return after Mass when you are toiletted."
  He held her hand. ""Bathed." You're
wonderful. I love y--" Abruptly their
eyes went to the door as someone tried the handle.
But the bolt was on.
  "I did it when you were asleep." She chuckled
like a little girl playing a game. Again the handle
moved. "Servants always come in without knocking,
they need to be taught lessons!"
  "Mass'er!" the servant called out,
"tea-ah!"
  "Tell him to go away and come back in five
minutes."
  Struan, caught up in her pleasure, shouted
the order in Cantonese, and they heard the man go
off grumbling.
  She laughed. "You must teach me
Chinese-speaking."
  "I'll try."
  "What's "I love you"?"
  "They don't have a word for love, not like us."
  A frown went across her face. "How sad!"
  She slipped over to the door, unbolted it,
blew him a kiss, and vanished into her own
suite. Her bolt slid home.
  He watched the door, aching. Then he heard the
bells change, becoming more insistent, reminding
him: Mass!
  His heart twisted. Didn't think about that, that
she was Catholic. Mother's diehard Church of
England, twice on Sundays, Father as well, us
too, in procession, along with every other decent
family in Hong Kong.
  Catholic?
  Doesn't matter, I ... I don't mind.
I've got to have her, he told himself, his healthy,
hungry throbbing ache pushing the pain away. "I
must."
        END OF VOLUME II


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume III of Twelve Volumes
       Pages i-ii and 449-678




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK ONE

                 

    Sunday, 28th September: (continued)
  That afternoon the four perspiring Japanese
porters put down the iron-banded chest watched
by three Bakufu officials of no import,
Sir William, interpreters, an officer from the
army accounting department, the Legation shroff, a
Chinese, and Vargas, to check him.
  They were in the main Legation reception room, the
windows open and Sir William was hard put not
to beam. Laboriously one of the officials
produced an ornate key and unlocked the chest.
Within were silver Mexican dollars, a few
tael bars of gold--about an ounce and a third in
weight--and some of silver.
  "Ask why the indemnity isn't all in gold
as agreed?"
  "The Official says they could not obtain the
gold in time but these are clean Mex and legal
currency, and will you please give him a
receipt." "Clean" coins meant those that were
unshaved, or unclipped, a common practice,
and sloughed off on to the unwary.
  "Begin counting."
  Happily his shroff tipped the contents onto the
carpet. At once he spotted a clipped
coin, Vargas another and another. These were put
to one side. Every eye stayed on the carpet, on the
neatly stacked, growing piles of coins. Five
thousand pounds sterling was an immense sum when the
salary of a full-time interpreter was four hundred
a year and pay your own lodgings, a shroff a
hundred (though a good percentage of everything that
passed through his hands would somehow stick there), a
servant in London twenty pounds a year and
all found, a soldier five pennies a day, a
sailor six, an Admiral six hundred
pounds a year.
  The counting was quickly done. Both shroffs checked
the weight of each small bar of gold twice,
then the weight each of the stacks of chipped coins,
then used an abacus to calculate the total
against the current rate of exchange.
  Vargas said, "It comes to four thousand and
eighty-four pounds, six shillings and seven pence
farthing, Sir William, in clean
coin, five hundred and twenty pounds in gold,
ninety-two pounds sixteen in clipped coins for a
grand total of four thousand, six hundred and
ninety-seven pounds, two shillings, and seven
pence farthing."
  "Sorry, eight pence, Mass'er." The
Chinese bowed and nodded his head, his pigtail long
and thick, making the slight, face-saving
adjustment as agreed in advance with Vargas,
deciding that the amount that his Portuguese counterpart
had deducted for their fee, two and a half
percent, or one hundred and seventeen pounds,
eight shillings and sixpence between them, was less than
what he would have maneuvered, but passable for half
an hour's work.
  Sir William said, "Vargas, put it
back in the chest, give them a receipt with a
note that the underpayment will be added to the last
installment. Johann, thank them, and say we will
expect the full amount, in gold, in nineteen
days."
  Johann obeyed. At once the other
interpreter began a long statement. "They now
ask for an extension, sir, and--"
  "No extension." Sir William sighed,
dismissed the others and prepared for another hour,
closing his ears until he was astonished to hear
Johann say, "They've suddenly come to the
point, sir: it's the Yedo meeting, sir. They
ask that this be delayed another thirty days to make
it fifty days from now ... the exact words are: the
Sh@ogun will return from Ky@oto then and he has
informed the Council of Elders to advise the
Foreign Ministers that he would grant them an
audience on that day."
  To give himself time to think, Sir William
called out, "Lun!" Lun appeared instantly.
"Tea!"
  Within seconds the trays arrived. And cigars,
snuff and pipe tobacco. Soon the room was
filled with smoke and everyone coughing and all the time
Sir William was considering options.
  First and foremost I'm probably dealing with
low-level officials, so anything agreed will be
subject to further negotiation. Next, in any
event the fifty days will surely extend into two
months, even three, but if we have an audience
with the Ultimate Power, of course under British
leadership, we will have taken a lasting step forward.
Actually, I don't mind if the
delay goes to three, even four months. By then
I'll have Lord Russell's approval for war,
reinforcements will be en route from India and Hong
Kong, the Admiral will have his damned authority,
and we'll have the forces to invest, hold and fortify
Yedo if we have to.
  I could say, let us have the meeting as planned
and then the Sh@ogun meeting. That would be best, but
I feel they won't go against the mystical
Sh@ogun's wishes and somehow they'll wheedle and
twist and mesh us again.
  Johann said, "The spokesman says, as
that's agreed, we will bid you farewell."
  "Nothing is agreed. A thirty-day extension
is not possible for many reasons. We have already
arranged a date for the Council of Elders that will
take place as planned and then, ten days later
we will be pleased to meet the Sh@ogun."
  After an hour of sucked-in breaths, aghast
silences, blunt Anglo-Saxonese, Sir
William allowed himself to be whittled down and
got his compromise position: The meeting with the
Council of Elders to take place as planned,
and the meeting with the Sh@ogun twenty days after that.
  Once alone again with Sir William,
Johann said, "They won't abide by it."
  "Yes, I know. Never mind."
  "Sir William, my contract's up in a
couple of months. I won't renew."
  Sir William said sharply, "I can't do
without your services for at least six months."
  "It's time to go home. This place is going
to be a bloodbath soon and I've no want to have
my head on a spike."
  "I'll increase your salary by fifty pounds a
year."
  "It's not the money, Sir William. I'm
tired. Ninety-eight percent of all the talk
is sheiss. I've no patience now to sift the
kernel of wheat from the barrel of dung!"
  "I need you for these two meetings."
  "They'll never take place. Two months
odd, then I'm off, the exact day is on the
paper. Sorry, Sir William, but that's the
end, and now I am going to get drunk." He
left.
  Sir William went across the hall to his
office window and searched the horizon. It was
nearing sunset now. No sign of any of the
fleet. My God, I hope they're
safe. Must keep Johann somehow. Tyrer
won't be ready for a year at least. Who can I
get that I can trust? God damn it!
  Light from the dying sun illuminated the
sparsely furnished room, not enough to see by so he
lit an oil lamp, adjusting the wick
carefully. On his desk were neat piles of
dispatches, his edition of All the Year Round
--long since read from cover to cover, with all the
newspapers from the last mail ship, several
editions of Illustrated London News and
Punch. He picked up the advance copy of
Turgenev's Fathers and Sons in Russian
sent to him by a friend at the Court of St.
Petersburg, amongst other English and French
books, started to read it then, distracted, put it
aside and began the second letter of the day to the
Governor of Hong Kong, giving details of
today's meeting, and asking for a replacement for
Johann. Lun came in silently, closing the
door.
  "Yes, Lun?"
  Lun came up to his desk, hesitated, then
dropped his voice. "Mass'er," he said
cautiously, "hear trou'bel, trou'bel soon
Yedo Big House, big trou'bel."
  Sir William stared up at him. Big
House was what the Chinese servants called their
Yedo Legation. "What trouble?"
  Lun shrugged. "Trou'bel."
  "When trouble?"
  Again Lun shrugged. "Whisk'y water,
heya?"
  Sir William nodded thoughtfully. From time
to time Lun whispered rumors to him with an
uncanny knack of being right. He watched him
pad over to the sideboard and make the drink, just as
he liked it.

  Phillip Tyrer and the kilted Captain were
watching the same sunset from an upstairs window
of the Legation at Yedo, the usual groups of
samurai stationed outside the walls and in all
approaches up the hill. Dark reds and orange
and browns on the empty horizon mixed with a
strip of blue above the sea. "Will the weather be good
tomorrow?"
  "Don't know much about the weather here, Mr.
Tyrer. If we were in Scotland I could give you
a wee forecast," the Captain, a
sandy-haired, thirty-year-old ramrod,
laughed. "Rain with scattered showers ... but, och
ay, it's no' so bad."
  "I've never been to Scotland, but I will on
my next leave. When do you go home?"
  "Maybe next year, or the year after. This is
only my second year." Their attention went
back to the square. Four Highlanders and a sergeant
plodded up the hill through the samurai and entered the
iron gates, returning from a routine patrol
to the wharf where a detachment of marines and a cutter were
stationed. Samurai were always in attendance, standing
around, sometimes chatting, or in clusters near
fires that they lit if it was cold, movement
constant. No one, soldier or Legation
employee, had been prevented from leaving or
entering, though all had passed through intense, always
silent scrutiny.
  "Excuse me, I'll see the Sergeant,
make sure our cutter's there, in case, and
close down for the night. Dinner at seven as
usual?"
  "Yes." When he was alone Tyrer stifled a
nervous yawn, stretched and moved his arm to ease the
slight ache there. His wound had healed perfectly,
no longer any need to use a sling. I'm
bloody lucky, he thought, except for Wee
Willie. Damn the man for sending me here,
I'm supposed to be training to be an
interpreter, not a dogsbody. Damn damn
damn. And now I'll miss Andr`e's recital
that I was so looking forward to. Angelique is
certain to be there.
  Rumors of her secret betrothal had rushed
around the Settlement like a foehn wind--
unsettling. Hints dropped to her or to Struan
had brought forth neither denial or confirmation, or
even a clue. In the Club the betting was two
to one that it was a fact, twenty to one that the
marriage would never take place: "Struan's
as sick as a dog, she's Catholic and you know his
mum for God's sake, Jamie!"
  "Taken! He's better every day and you don't
know him like I do. Ten guineas against two
hundred."
  "Charlie, what odds you give me that one's
up the spout?"'
  "Oh for God's sake!"
  "Angel Tits ain't a doxy for Chris'
sake!"
  "A thousand to one?"'
  "Done by God ... a golden guinea!"
  To Tyrer and Pallidar's disgust, the odds and
bets, ever more personal and detailed, changed
daily. "The buggers here are a lot of
guttersnipes!"
  "You're right of course, Pallidar. A
scummy lot!"
  With intense speculation going on about Struan and
Angelique, there was more about the extent of the storm
and the fleet, worse that it might be in dire
trouble, and doom generally. Japanese merchants
were more nervous than usual too, whispering rumors
of insurrections all over Japan against or for the
Bakufu, that the mystical Mikado, supposed
high priest of all Japanese who held sway
in Ky@oto, had ordered all samurai
to attack Yokohama.
  "Poppycock, if you ask me," the
Westerners told one another, but more and more guns were
purchased and even the two trader wives slept
with a loaded weapon beside their beds. Drunk Town
was rumored to be an armed camp.
  Then, a few days ago, an act of war: an
American merchantman, storm battered, had
limped into Yokohama. In the Shimonoseki
Straits, inbound from Shanghai for Yokohama
with a cargo of silver, ammunition and arms, then
onwards to the Philippines with opium, tea and
general trade goods, she had been fired upon
by shore batteries.
  "The devil you were!" someone called out over
the explosion of anger in the Club.
  "You're goddam right we were! And us as
peaceful as a buttercup! Those Choshu bastards
were mighty accurate--what crazy bastard sold
them goddam cannon? Blew off our top
t'gallants before we knew what was happening and
could take evading action. Sure, we returned
their fire but we've only a couple of stinky
goddam five-pounders that'd not give a body much
cause to hiccup. We counted as many as twenty
cannon."
  "My God, twenty cannon and expert
gunners could easily close Shimonoseki, and
if that happens we're in dead trouble. That's the
quickest and only safe way here."
  "Ay! The Inland Waters are a must,
by God!"
  "Where the hell's the fleet? They
could go and knock out those batteries! What about our
trade?"'
  "Ay, where's the fleet, hope to God she's
safe!"
  "And if she's not?"'
  "Charlie, we'll just have to send for another.
..."
  Stupid people, Tyrer thought, all they can think of
is send for the fleet, boozing and money.
  Thank God the French Admiral brought
back Andr`e with him. Thank God for Andr`e
even though he's volatile and strange but that's
only because he's French. Thanks to him I've
already two exercise books crammed with
Japanese words and phrases, my daily
journal's chockablock with an abundance of
folklore, I've a rendezvous with a Jesuit
when we're again in Yokohama. Such marvelous
progress and so important for me to learn quickly
--and that's without even thinking about the Yoshiwara.
  Three visits. The first two guided, the
third alone.
  "Andr`e, I just can't tell you how much I
appreciate all the time you've given me, and
all the help. And as to tonight, I can never repay
you, never."
  That was after the first visit.
  Nervous, flushed, sweating, almost tongue-tied
but pretending to be manly he had followed Andr`e
out of the Settlement at dusk, joining the jovial
crowds of men Yoshiwara bound, passed the
samurai guards, politely raising top hats
and receiving perfunctory bows in return, across the
Bridge to Paradise towards the tall gates in
the enclosing wooden fence.
  "Yoshiwara means Place of Reeds,"
Andr`e said expansively, both of them well
lubricated with champagne that in Tyrer's case
had only increased his foreboding. "It was the name
of a district in Yedo, a reclaimed swamp, where
the first ever, fenced bordello area was decreed and
built by Sh@ogun Toranaga two and a half
centuries ago. Before that, bordellos were
scattered everywhere. Since then, so we're told,
all cities and towns have similar enclosures,
all of them licensed and tightly controlled.
By custom, many are called Yoshiwara. See
those?"'
  Above the gate, a series of Chinese characters were
etched elegantly into the wood. "They
mean, Lust is pressing, something must be done
about it."
  Tyrer laughed nervously. Many guards inside
and outside the gate. Last night when Andr`e had
volunteered to escort him--they were in the Club
then, drinking--he had mentioned a trader had told
him the guards were there, not just to keep the peace, but
mostly to keep the whores from escaping, "So
they're really all slaves, aren't they?"'
To his shock he had seen Poncin flush
angrily.
  "Mon Dieu, don't think of them as
whores or call them whores as we understand the word.
They're not slaves. Some are indentured for a
number of years, many sold by their parents at an
early age, again for a number of years, but their
contracts are Bakufu approved and registered.
They're not whores, they're Ladies of the
Willow World and don't forget it. Ladies!"
  "Sorry, I ..."
  But Andr`e had paid no attention. "Some are
geishas--Art Persons--those trained to entertain
you, sing and dance and play silly games and are not
for bedding. The rest, mon Dieu, I've
told you, don't think of them as whores, think of
them as Pleasure Women, trained to please,
trained over many years."
  "Sorry, I didn't know."
  "If you treat them properly they'll give you
pleasure, almost any kind you want--if they
want to--and if the money you give is
correct. You give them money which has no
significance, they give you their youth. It's an
odd bargain." Andr`e had looked at him
strangely. "They give you their youth and hide the
tears you cause." He quaffed his wine and stared
at the cup, abruptly maudlin.
  Tyrer remembered how he had quietly
refilled their glasses, cursing himself for breaking
the feeling of easy friendship, to him valuable
friendship, swearing to be more cautious in future and
wondering why the sudden fury. "Tears?"'
  "Their life isn't good, but even so it isn't
always bad. For some it can be marvelous. The most
beautiful and accomplished become famous, they're
sought after by even the most important daimyo--
kings--in the land, they can marry in high places,
marry rich merchants, even samurai. But for our
Ladies of the Willow World who are just for us
gai-jin," Andr`e had continued
bitterly, "there's no future but to open another
house here, to drink sak`e and employ other
girls. Mon Dieu, treat them all
properly, because once they're here they're
polluted in the eyes of all other
Japanese."
  "Sorry. How awful."
  "Yes, no one understan--"' A burst of
drunken laughter from the men around drowned him for a
moment, the Club filled, raucous and steaming.
"I tell you these cretins don't care or
give a damn, none of them, except
Canterbury, he did." Andr`e had looked
up from the dregs of his drink. "You're young and
unsullied, here for a year or two and seem
willing to learn, so I thought ... there's so much
to learn, so much good," he had said suddenly and
left.
  That was last night and now they were within the
Yoshiwara gate, Andr`e took out his small
pistol. "Phillip, are you armed?"'
  "No."
  Andr`e gave the pistol to the unctuous
attendant who gave him a receipt and put it
with many others. "No weapons are allowed within the
fence--the same in all Yoshiwaras, even
samurai must give up their swords. On you
va!"
  Ahead of them now, on either side of the wide
street and alleys leading off it, were lines of neat
little houses, many for eating or just small bars,
all built of wood with verandas and oiled paper
shoji screens, and raised off the ground on low
pilings. Everywhere color and sprays of flowers,
noise and laughter, and lanterns, candles and oil
lamps. "Fire's a huge hazard,
Phillip. This whole place burned down the first
year but within the week, booming again."
  All the Houses bore individual signs.
Some had open doors and sliding shoji windows.
Many girls were in them, ornately or demurely
dressed in kimonos of varying quality, depending
on the standing of the House. Other girls were
promenading, some with colorful umbrellas, some
attended by maids, paying little or no attention to the
gawking men. Intermixed were vendors of all
kinds, and swarms of maids shouting the virtues
of the Houses in versions of pithy, raucous
pidgin, and sounding over everything the happy banter
of potential customers, most of whom were
recognized and had their favored places. There were
no Japanese except for guards, servants,
porters and masseurs.
  "Never forget, Yoshiwaras are a place for
joy, the pleasures of the flesh, eating and drinking
as well, and that there's no such thing as sin in
Japan, original sin, any kind of sin."
Andr`e laughed and led the way through the well-ordered
crowds except a few brawling drunks who were
quickly and good-naturedly pulled apart by huge,
expert bouncers, at once to be sat on stools
and plied with more sak`e by the ever attentive maids.
  "Drunks are welcome, Phillip, because
they lose count of their money. But don't ever
pick a quarrel with a bouncer, they're
fantastically good at unarmed combat."
  "Compared to our Drunk Town this place is as
well disciplined as the Regent's Promenade at
Brighton." A boisterous maid caught
Tyrer's arm and tried to pull him into a
doorway. "Sak`e heya? Jig jig plenty
good Mass'er ..."
  "Iy`e, domo, iy`e ..." Tyrer
burst out--no, thank you no--and hurriedly
caught up with Andr`e. "My God, I had
to really tug to get away."
  "That's their job." Andr`e turned off the
main street through a passageway between dwellings,
down another, stopped at a seedy door set
into a fence, a grubby sign above, and knocked.
Tyrer recognized the characters that Andr`e had
written for him earlier: House of the Three
Carp. A small grill slid back. Eyes
peered out. The door opened and Tyrer stepped into a
wonderland.
  Tiny garden, oil lanterns and candlelight.
Glistening grey stepping stones in green moss,
clusters of flowers, many small maples--
blood-red leaves against more green--pale orange
light coming from the half-obscured shoji. Little
bridge over a miniature stream, waterfall
nearby. Kneeling on the veranda was a middle-aged
woman, the mama-san, beautifully attired and
coiffured. "Bonsoir, Monsieur
Furansu-san," she said, put both her hands
on the veranda and bowed.
  Andr`e bowed back. "Raiko-san,
konbanwa. Ikaga desu ka?"' Good evening,
how are you? "Kore wa watashi no
lomodachi desu, Tyrer-san."
This is my friend, Mr. Tyrer.
  "Ah so desu ka? Taira-san?"'
She bowed gravely, awkwardly Tyrer bowed,
then she beckoned them to follow her.
  "She says Taira is a famous old
Japanese name. You're in luck, Phillip,
most of us go by nicknames. I'm Furansu-san
--the nearest they can get to Frenchman."
  Taking off their shoes so as not to dirty the very
clean and expensive tatami, then sitting
awkwardly cross-legged in the room, Andr`e
Poncin explaining the takoyama, the alcove
for a special hanging scroll and flower
arrangement, changed daily, guiding him
to appreciate the quality of the shoji and woods.
  Sak`e arrived. The maid was young, perhaps ten,
not pretty but deft and silent. Raiko poured,
first for Andr`e and then Tyrer, then herself. She
sipped, Andr`e drained the tiny cup and held it
out for more. Tyrer did the same, finding the taste
of the warm wine not unpleasant but insipid. Both
cups were immediately filled and drained and refilled.
More trays and more flasks.
  Tyrer lost count but soon he was enveloped with a
pleasing glow, forgot his nervousness and watched and
listened and understood almost nothing the other two said,
just a word here and there. Raiko's hair was black
and shining and dressed with many ornate combs, her
face thick with white powder, neither ugly nor
beautiful just different, her kimono pink silk with
interweaving green carp.
  "A carp is koi, usually a sign of good
luck," Andr`e had explained earlier.
"Townsend Harris's mistress, the Shimoda
courtesan the Bakufu arranged to distract him,
called herself Koi, but I'm afraid it didn't
bring her luck."
  "Oh? What happened?"'
  "The story told amongst courtesans here is
that he adored her and when he left he gave her
money, enough to set herself up--she was with him for about
two years. Shortly after he returned
to America, she just vanished. Probably drank
herself to death or committed suicide."
  "She loved him that much?"'
  "They say that in the beginning when the Bakufu
approached her she adamantly refused to go with a
foreigner--an unheard-of aberration, don't forget
he was the first ever to be actually allowed to live
on Japanese soil. She begged
the Bakufu to chose someone else, to allow her
to live in peace, said she would become a Buddhist
nun, she even swore she would kill herself. But
they were equally adamant, begging her to help them
solve this problem gai-jin, pleading with her for
weeks to be his consort, wearing her down by what
means no one knows. So she agreed and they thanked
her. And when Harris left they all turned their
backs on her, Bakufu, everyone: Ah so
sorry, but any woman who has gone with a
foreigner is tainted forever."
  "How awful!"
  "Yes, in our terms, and so sad. But
remember, this is the Land of Tears. Now she is
legend, honored by her peers and by those who turned
their backs, because of her sacrifice."
  "I don't understand."
  "Nor do I, nor any of us. But they do.
Japanese do."
  How strange, Tyrer thought again. Like this little
house and this man and woman, chattering half in
Japanese, half in pidgin, laughing one with
another, one a madam the other a customer, both
pretending they are something else. More and more sak`e.
Then she bowed and got up and left.
  "Sak`e, Phillip?"'
  "Thanks. It's quite nice, isn't it?"'
  After a pause, Andr`e said, "You're the first
person I've ever brought here."
  "Oh? Why me?"'
  The Frenchman twisted the porcelain cup in his
fingers, drained the last drop, poured some more, then
began in French, his voice soft and filled with
warmth, "Because you're the first person I've met
in Yokohama with ... because you speak French,
you're cultured, your mind is like a sponge,
you're young, not far off half my age, eh?
You're twenty-one, and not like the others, you're
untainted and you'll be here for a few years." He
smiled, spinning the web tighter, telling only
part of the truth, molding it: "Truly you're the
first person I've met who, alors, even though
you're English and actually an enemy of France,
you're the only one who somehow seems to merit the knowledge
I've acquired." An embarrassed smile.
"Difficult to explain. Perhaps because I've always
wanted to be teacher, perhaps because I've never had a
son, never married, perhaps because soon I have to move
back to Shanghai, perhaps because we've enemies enough
and perhaps ... perhaps you could be a firm
friend."
  "I would be honored to be your friend," Tyrer
said at once, enmeshed and under his spell, "and I
really do think, I really have always thought we should be
allies, France and Britain, not enemies
and--"' The shoji slid back. Raiko, on her
knees beckoned Tyrer. His heart surged.
  Andr`e Poncin smiled. "Just follow her, and
remember what I told you."
  As in a dream Phillip Tyrer got up
unsteadily and padded after her, down a corridor,
into a room, across it and along a veranda, into another
empty room where she motioned him in, closed the
shoji, and left him.
  A shaded oil lamp. Charcoal brazier for
warmth. Shadows and darkness and patches of light.
Futons--small square mattresses--laid
out as a bed on the floor, a bed for two. Downy
coverlets. Two yukatas, wide sleeved,
patterned cotton gown for sleeping in. Through a
small door a bathhouse, candle-lit, tall
wooden tub filled with steaming water.
Sweet-smelling soap. Low, three-legged
stool. Diminutive towels. Everything as Andr`e
had foretold.
  His heart was beating very fast now and he pushed his
mind to remember Andr`e's instructions through the
sak`e haze.
  Methodically, he began to undress. Coat,
waistcoat, cravat, shirt, woolen vest, each
article meticulously folded and nervously
placed in a pile. Awkwardly sitting, then
pulling off his socks, reluctantly his trousers
and standing up once more. Only his woolen long
johns remained. Weaving a little, then an
embarrassed shrug and he took them off and folded
them, even more carefully. His skin prickled
into goose bumps and he walked into the bathhouse.
  There he scooped water from the barrel as he had
been told and spilled it over his shoulders, the
warmth pleasant. Another and then sound of the shoji
opening and he glanced around. "Christ
Almighty," he muttered.
  The woman was beefy with huge forearms, her
yukata brief, nothing under except a loincloth
and she strode purposefully towards him with a
flat smile, motioned him to squat on the stool.
In absolute embarrassment he obeyed. At
once she noticed the healing scar on his arm and
sucked in her breath, said something that he
could not understand.
  He forced a smile. "Tokaid@o."
  "Wakarimasu." I understand. Then, before
he could stop her she poured water over his head--
unexpectedly and not part of his forewarning--and began
soaping and washing his long hair, then his body, her
fingers hard, expert and insistent, but taking care not
to hurt his arm. Arms legs back front, then
offering him the cloth and pointing between his legs. Still in
shock he cleansed those parts, meekly handed the
cloth back. "Thank you," he muttered.
"Oh, sorry, domo."
  More water took away the last of the soap and she
pointed to the tub. "Dozo!" Please.
  Andr`e had explained: "Phillip, just
remember that unlike with us, you have to be washed and
clean before you get into the bath, so others can use the
same water--which is very sensible, don't forget
wood is very expensive and it takes a long time
to heat enough--so don't piss in it either, and don't
think of her as a woman when you're in the
bathhouse, just a helper. She cleans you
outside, then inside, no?"'
  Tyrer eased himself into the tub. It was hot but not
too hot and he closed his eyes not wanting
to watch the woman making the bath tidy. Christ,
he thought in misery, I'll never be able to perform with
her. Andr`e's made a vast mistake.
  "But ... well, I, er, don't know how much
I, er, pay, or do I give the girl the money
first or what?"'
  "Mon Dieu, you should never actually give
money to any girl, anywhere, that's the height of
bad manners, though you can barter savagely with the
mama-san, sometimes with the girl herself, but only after
tea or sak`e. Before you leave you'd put it
discreetly in a place she would see it. In the
House of the Three Carp, you give no money,
it's a special place--there are others like
it--only for special customers, one of which I
am. They'll send you a bill, two or three
times a year. But listen, before we go there you have
to swear by God that you'll pay the bill the moment
it's presented, and that you will never, never introduce
anyone else there or talk about it."
  So he had sworn and promised, wanting to ask
how much but not daring to. "The, er, bill, when
does that come?"'
  "When it pleases the mama-san. I told
you, Phillip, you can have pleasure the
year round on credit, under the correct
circumstances--of course I'm surety for you.
..."
  The warmth of the bath water permeated him. He
hardly heard her bustle out and then, later,
bustle back again.
  "Taira-san?"'
  "Hai?"' Yes?
  She was holding up a towel. Curiously
lethargic, he climbed out, his muscles drowsed
by the water, and let her dry him. Once more the
special places he did himself, finding it
easier this time. A comb for his hair. Dry starched
yukata and she motioned him towards the bed.
  Again panic surged through him. Shakily he
forced himself to lie down. She covered him, folded
back the other coverlet and again left.
  His heart was thundering but lying down felt
marvelous, the mattress soft and clean and
sweet-smelling, feeling cleaner than he had
felt for years. Soon he was calmer and then the
shoji opened and closed and he was filled with utter
relief but no longer calm. The half-seen
girl was tiny, willowy, pale yellow yokata,
hair long and cascading. Now she was kneeling beside
the bed. "Konbanwa, Taira-san.
Ikaga desu ka? Watashi wa Ako."
Good evening, Mr. Taira. Are you well? I
am Ako.
  "Konbanwa, Ako-san. Watashi wa
Phillip Tyrer desu."
  She frowned. "F ... urri ... f."
She tried to say Phillip several times but could
not, then laughed gaily, said something he did not
understand, ending with Taira-san.
  He was sitting up now, watching her, heart
pounding, helpless, not attracted by her, and now she
was pointing to the other side of the bed. "Dozo?"'
Please, may I?
  "Dozo." In the candlelight he could not
see her clearly, just enough to know that she was young, he
estimated about his own age, that her face was smooth
and white with powder, teeth white, red lips,
hair shiny, nose almost roman, eyes narrow
ellipses, her smile kind. She got into the bed
and settled herself, turned and watched him.
Waiting. His shyness and inexperience paralyzed him.
  Christ, how do I tell her I don't want
her, don't want anyone now, that I can't, I
know I can't and it won't, it won't
tonight, it won't and I'll disgrace myself and Andr`e
... Andr`e! What can I tell him? I'll be
a laughingstock, oh Christ why did I agree?
  Her hand reached out and touched his cheek.
Involuntarily he shivered.
  Ako murmured sweet sounding words of
encouragement but inside she was smiling, knowing what
to expect from this child of a man, well prepared
by Raiko-san: "Ako, tonight is a rare moment
in your life and you must remember every detail
to regale us with at first meal. Your client is a
friend of Frenchy, and unique in our world--he's
virgin. Frenchy says he is so shy you will not
believe it, that he will be frightened, will probably
weep when his Honorable Weapon fails him, he
may even wet the bed in his frustrated
excitement, but do not worry, dear Ako,
Frenchy assures me you can deal with him in the
normal way, and that you've nothing to worry about."
  "Eeee, I'll never understand gai-jin,
Raiko-san."
  "Nor I. Certainly they are all
peculiar, uncivilized, but fortunately most
are pleasantly rich, it's our destiny to be here
so we must make the most of it. Very important,
Frenchy says this one is an important
English official, potentially a long-term
customer so make him experience the Clouds and the
Rain, one way or another, even if ... even
if you have to use the Ultimate."
  "Oh ko!"
  "The honor of the house is at stake."
  "Oh! I understand. In that case ... Somehow
I will."
  "I have every confidence, Ako-chan, after all you
have almost thirty years experience in our Willow
World."
  "Is he like Frenchy in his tastes, do you
think?"'
  "That he enjoys his back part tickled, and
occasionally Pleasure Pearls? Perhaps you should be
prepared but I asked Frenchy directly if the
youth had leanings towards liking men and he assured
me no. Curious that Frenchy chose our House
to initiate a friend, instead of the others he now
frequents."
  "The House was not to blame, never. Please,
don't think about it, Raiko-chan. I am
honored that you have chosen me, I will do everything
necessary."
  "Of course. Eeee, when you think that the
Steaming Stalks of gai-jin are usually much larger
than civilized persons, that most gai-jin
fornicate satisfactorily though without
Japanese vigor, flair and urge to plumb the
limits, except for Frenchy you would think they would
be happy fornicators like normal persons. But
they are not, they have so many cobwebs in their heads that
somehow fornication is not our Most Heavenly
Pleasure, but a some kind of secret,
religious evil. Weird."
  Experimenting now, Ako moved closer and
caressed his chest, then shifted her hand lower and was
hard put not to laugh out loud as the youth jerked with
fright. It took her a few moments to compose
herself. "Taira-san?"' she murmured.
  "Yes, er, hai, Ako-san?"'
  She took his hand and placed it inside her
yukata on her breast, leaned over and kissed his
shoulder, forewarned to be careful of the wound in his arm
that a courageous shishi had given him. No
reaction. Moving against him closer. Whispering how
utterly brave, how strong and manly, how
fulsome the maid had described him and his fruit.
All the while patiently caressing his chest,
feeling him shiver but still no passion. Minutes
passed. Still nothing. Her concern grew. Fingers
soft as butterflies and yet still he lay inert--
hands, lips, everything. Gently caressing, careful
to circle, no real intimacy yet. More
minutes. Still nothing. Her dismay mounted. Fear that
she might fail overlaid her dismay. Touching his
ear with her tongue.
  Ah, a slight reward: her name spoken
throatily and his lips kissing her neck.
Eeee, she thought and relaxed and put her lips
around his nipple. Now it's only a matter of
time to explode his virginity to the skies, then I
can order some sak`e and sleep till dawn and
forget that I am forty-three and childless, and only
remember that Raiko-san rescued me from the
sixth-class House that my age and lack of
beauty had relegated me to.

  Tyrer was idly watching the samurai in the
Legation square, the sun touching the horizon, his
mind increasingly beset by Ako, then two nights
later, Hamako. Then Her.
  Fujiko. The night before last.
  He felt himself hardening and eased that
part more comfortably, knowing that now he was inexorably
caught in that world, the Floating World where, as
Andr`e had told him, living was only for the moment,
for pleasure, drifting with never a care like a
blossom in the current of a calm river.
  "It's not always calm, Phillip. What's
she like, Fujiko?"'
  "Oh, er, haven't you seen her, don't you
know her?"'
  "No, I only told Raiko-san the
sort of girl you might like, the accent being on
"sleeping dictionary." How was she?"'
  He had laughed to cover his complete
embarrassment and disquiet at being asked such a
personal question, so directly. But Andr`e had
given him so much that he wanted to be "French"
and forthright, so he put aside his misgivings that a
gentleman should not discuss or disclose such
personal information. "She ... she's younger than
I am, small, tiny in fact, not, not pretty
in our terms but she's astonishingly attractive.
I think I understood her to say that she was new
there."
  "I meant in bed, how was she? Better than
the others?"'
  "Oh. Well, there was, er, well no
comparison."
  "Was she more vigorous? Sensuous? Eh?"'
  "Well, yes, er, dressed or undressed,
incredible. Special. Again I can't thank you
enough, I owe you so much."
  "De rien, mon vieux."
  "It's true. Next time ... next time
you'll meet her."
  "Mon Dieu no, that's a rule. Never
introduce your "special" to anyone, least of
all a friend. Don't forget, until you set her
up in your own place, with you paying the bills,
she's available for anyone with the money--if she
wants."
  "Oh. I'd forgotten," he had said, hiding
the truth.
  "Even if she's set up she could still have a
lover on the side if she wants. Who's
to know?"'
  "I suppose so." More anguish.
  "Don't fall in love, my friend, not with a
courtesan. Take them for what they are,
pleasure persons. Enjoy them, like them but don't
love them--and never let them fall in
love with you ..."
  Tyrer shivered, hating the truth, hating the
idea of her being with another, and bedding as they had
bedded, hating that it was for money, hating the ache that
was in his loins. My God she really was so
special, lovely, liquid, a sweet
chatterbox, gentle, kind, so young and only in the
House for such a short time. Should I set her
up? Not should, could I? I'm sure Andr`e has
his own place with his special friend though he's never
said, nor would I ever ask. Christ, how much would
that cost? Bound to be more than I could afford. ...
  Don't think about that now! Or her.
  With an effort he put his attention on the garden
below but the ache remained. Part of the Highland
detachment were assembling around the flagstaff, the
trumpeter and four kettledrummers already in
position for the lowering of the flag. Routine. The
motley group of gardeners were collecting by the
gate to be counted and then dismissed. They
grovelled their way through the gates and through the
samurai and were gone. Routine. Sentries
closed and bolted the iron gates. Routine.
Drums and trumpet sounding as the Union Jack
was slowly lowered--no sun sets on the British
flag was British law throughout the world. Routine.
Most of the samurai marching away now, leaving
only a token force for the night. Routine.
  Tyrer shivered.
  If everything's routine why am I so nervous?

  The Legation gardeners trooped into their
dormitory hovel that adjoined the other side of the
Buddhist temple. None of them met
Hiraga's gaze. All had been warned that their
lives, and the lives of all their generations depended
on his safety.
  "Beware of talking to strangers," he had
told them. "If the Bakufu find you've
harbored me your reward will be just the same,
except you will be crucified, not killed
cleanly."
  With all their abject protestations that he was
safe, that he could trust them, Hiraga knew that
he was never secure. Since the Anjo ambush
ten days ago, most of the time he had been at their
Kanagawa safe house, the Inn of the Midnight
Blossoms. That the attack had failed and all
but one of his companions killed was karma, nothing
else.
  Yesterday a letter had arrived from Katsumata,
the leading, though clandestine, Satsuma shishi, now
in Ky@oto: Urgent: in a few weeks,
Sh@ogun Nobusada will create an unheard-of
precedent by coming here to pay the Emperor a state
visit. All shishi are advised to gather here at
once to plan how to intercept him, to send him
onwards, then to take possession of the Palace
Gates. Katsumata had signed his code
name: Raven.
  Hiraga had discussed what to do with Ori, then
decided to return here to Yedo, determined to act
alone to destroy the British Legation, furious
that the Council of Elders seemed to have been
bamboozled and neutralized by the gai-jin.
"Ky@oto can wait, Ori. We've got
to press home our attack on the gai-jin. We
must infuriate them until they bombard Yedo.
Others can deal with the Sh@ogun and Ky@oto."
He would have brought Ori but Ori was helpless, his
wound worse, with no help from any doctor.
"What about your arm?"'
  "When it's unbearable, I'll commit
seppuku," Ori had said, his words slurred from
the sak`e he was using to dampen the pain--the three
of them, he, Ori and the mama-san, having a
final drink together. "Don't worry."
  "Isn't there another doctor, a safe
one?"'
  "No, Hiraga-san," the mama-san,
Noriko, said. She was a tiny woman of
fifty, her voice soft. "I even sent for a
Korean acupuncturist and herbalist, both
friends, but the poultices have been no value.
There's the giant gai-jin ..."
  "You're stupid," Ori shouted. "How many
times must I tell you? This is a bullet wound,
one of their bullets, and they saw me at
Kanagawa!"
  "Please excuse me," the mama-san said
humbly, her head to the tatami, "please
excuse this stupid person." She bowed again and
left, but in her secret heart she was cursing
Ori for failing to be a true shishi and not
committing seppuku while Hiraga was here, the
most perfect second a man could wish for, and so
lessen the awful danger surrounding her and her
House. News of the fate of the Inn of the
Forty-seven Ronin had rushed fifty ri and beyond
--an outrageous retribution to kill
all patrons, courtesans and servants and
to spike the head of the mama-san.
  Monstrous, she thought, inflamed. How can a
House forbid any samurai entrance, shishi or
not? In olden days samurai killed much more than
today, yes, but that was centuries ago and mostly
only when it was merited and not women or children. That was
when the law of the land was just, Sh@ogun Toranaga
just, his son and grandson just, before corruption and
dissipation became a way of life for descendant
Sh@oguns, daimyo and samurai alike, who
for a century and more have spread their rapacious
taxations over us like pus! The shishi are our only
hope! Sonno-joi!
  "Anjo must die before we die," she said
fervently when Hiraga had at length returned
safely two days after the attack. "We've
been petrified you'd been caught and burnt with the
others. It was all done on Anjo's orders,
Hiraga-san, on his orders--in fact he was
returning from the Inn when you attacked him near the
castle gates, he had personally ordered and
witnessed the executions, leaving men there in ambush
in case all you shishi returned unawares."
  "Who betrayed us, Hiraga?"' Ori had
asked.
  "The Mori samurai."
  "But Akimoto said he saw them engulfed and
killed."
  "It must have been one of them. Did anyone
else escape?"'
  "Akimoto--he hid out in another Inn for a
day and a night."
  "Where is he now?"'
  Noriko said, "He's occupied--shall I send
for him?"'
  "No. Tomorrow I will see him."
  "Anjo must pay in blood for the Inn--that's
against all custom!"
  "He will. So will the roju. So will Sh@ogun
Nobusada. And so will Yoshi."

  In his private quarters high up in the castle
keep, Yoshi was composing a poem. He wore a
blue silk kimono and sat at a low table, an
oil lamp on it and sheets of rice paper,
brushes of different thicknesses, water to soften the
block of jet ink that now had a tiny, inviting
pool in the hollowed-out center.
  Twilight was becoming night. From
outside the hum of Yedo's million souls ever
present. A few houses on fire as usual.
From the castle below the comforting, muted noise of
soldiers, hooves on cobblestones, an
occasional throaty laugh wafting upwards with the
smoke and smells of the cooking fires through the
decorative, bowman openings in the vast walls,
not yet shuttered against the night chill.
  This was his inner sanctum. Spartan.
Tatamis, a takoyama, the shoji door in
front of him so positioned and lit that he could see
the shape of any figure outside but no one there
could look within.
  Outside this room was a larger anteroom with
corridors leading off it to sleeping quarters,
empty at present except for retainers,
maids and Koiko, his special favorite. His
family--his wife, two sons and a daughter,
his consort and her son--were all safe and
heavily guarded in his hereditary, fortress
castle, Dragon's Tooth, in the mountains some
twenty ri northwards. Beyond this antechamber were
guards and other rooms with other guards, all
sworn to his personal service.
  His brush dipped into the ink pool. He poised
the point over the delicate rice paper then
wrote firmly:

Sword of my fathers
When in my hands
Twists uneasily

  The writing was in three short, flowing vertical
lines of characters, strong where they should be strong and soft
where softness would enhance the picture that the characters
made--never a second chance to refine or change
or correct even the slightest fault, the
texture of the rice paper sucking in the ink at
once to become indelibly a part of it, varying the
black to grey depending how the brush was used and the
amount of water therein.
  Coldly, he scrutinized what he had done,
the placement of the poem and the whole picture that the
shades of black calligraphy made within the
expanse of white, the shape and the fluid,
obscured clearness of his characters.
  It's good, he thought without vanity. I cannot do
better yet--this is almost to the limit of my
capability, if not at the limit. What about the
meaning of the poem, how it should be read?
Ah, that's the important question, that's why it is
good. But will it achieve what I want?
  These questions prompted him to review the shocking
state of affairs here and at Ky@oto. Word
arrived a few days ago that there had been a
sudden, bloody but successful coup there by Choshu
troops who had thrown out Satsuma and Tosa
forces who had, for the last six months, held power
there in an uneasy truce. Lord Ogama of
Choshu now commanded the Palace Gates.
  At the hastily convened meeting of the Council
tempers had flared, Anjo almost frothing with
fury. "Choshu, Satsuma and Tosa! Always
those three. They're dogs who must be crushed!
Without them everything would be in control."
  "True," Yoshi had said, "I tell you
all again we must order our troops in Ky@oto
to put down the rebellion at once--whatever the
cost!"
  "No, we have to wait, we have insufficient
forces there."
  Toyama, the old man, wiped his grizzled
chin and said, "I agree with Yoshi-dono. War
is the only way, we must declare Ogama of
Choshu outlaw!"
  "Impossible!" Adachi had said
querulously, for himself and the last Elder. "We
agree with Anjo, we cannot risk offending all
daimyos, encouraging them to mass against us."
  "We must act at once!" he had
repeated. "We must order our troops
to retake the Gates, put down the
rebellion."
  "We have insufficient forces," Anjo had
said stubbornly. "We will wait. Now is not the
time."
  "Why won't you listen to my advice?"'
By now Yoshi was so angered that it almost surfaced.
He had contained it with an effort, knowing that to rave
and lose his temper would be a fatal error and
turn them all permanently against him. Wasn't
he the youngest, the least experienced but the most
qualified, with the most influence amongst daimyos
who could, if he wished, alone amongst the
Elders, raise his standard and pitch the whole
country into civil war as had existed for centuries
before the Sh@ogun Toranaga? were they not all
jealous and spitting when he was appointed
Guardian and an Elder by Imperial
"request" without consulting them,
by whomever the Son of Heaven was manipulated?
"I know I'm right. Wasn't I right about the
gai-jin? I'm right about this."
  The plan he had conceived to remove the gai-jin
and their fleet from Yedo to gain time to deal with their own
internal problems had been a perfect success.
It was so simple: "With great ceremony and
feigned humility we give the gai-jin a
pittance of a ransom, propose a future
meeting with the Council which will be delayed and further
delayed or cancelled, or even staged with
puppets if need be, implying at the last
moment, when their patience is at an end, that a
meeting with the Sh@ogun when he returns is to be
arranged--which can also be delayed, renegotiated and
delayed and will never happen, or even if it does
sometime in the future, it will produce nothing we do
not wish.
  "We gained some of the time we needed, and
discovered a permanent way of dealing with them: use
their impatience against them, give them "promises"
and lots of soup but no fish, or at the most a
few rotting pieces we don't need or want.
They were satisfied, their fleet sailed away
into the storm and perhaps under the sea. None have
returned yet."
  Old Toyama said, "The gods aided us with
that storm, again their Divine Wind, kamikaze
wind, as they did against Kublai Khan's
invading hordes centuries ago. When we
expel them it will be the same, the gods will never
forsake us."
  Adachi had been preening himself. "It's true
I carried out our plan to perfection. The gai-jin
were as docile as a fifth-rate courtesan."
  "Gai-jin are a sore that will never heal while
we are weaker in military power or wealth,"
Anjo said irritably, wringing his hands. "They
are a sore that will not heal--not without burning it out,
and we cannot do that yet, not yet, not without means
to build ships and make cannon. We cannot be
diverted and order troops to take the Gates, not
yet. They are not the immediate enemy, nor Choshus,
the immediate enemy is sonno-joi and shishi
dogs."
  Yoshi had noticed how very much Anjo had
changed since the assassination attempt: now he
was far more irascible, stubborn, his resolve
weakened though his influence over the other Elders had
not. "I don't agree but if you think
we have insufficient forces let us order a general
mobilization and let us finish the outside lords and
any who join them!"
  Toyama said, "War is the only way,
Anjo-sama, forget shishi, forget gai-jin for the
moment. The Gates--first we must repossess our
hereditary rights."
  Anjo had said, "We will, at the right time.
Next: the Sh@ogun's visit will go forth as
planned."
  Over his further protests Anjo had again
carried the vote, three to two, and in private
had added malevolently, "I told you,
Yoshi-dono, they will always vote with me, shishi will
never succeed against me, nor will you, nor will
anyone."
  "Even Sh@ogun Nobusada?"'
  "He ... he is not an enemy and he takes
my advice."
  "And the Princess Yazu?"'
  "She will obey ... she will obey her
husband."
  "She will obey her brother, the Emperor,
until she dies."
  To his shock Anjo had said with a twisted
smile, "You propose an accident? Eh?"'
  "I propose nothing of the sort."
  Yoshi felt chilled, afraid the man was
becoming too dangerous to leave alive, already too
powerful to neutralize, too farsighted,
supported by a swarm of cohorts ready and able
to swallow him up ...
  A silhouette was approaching the door, almost
noiselessly. Without thinking his right hand went to his
long sword that lay beside him even though he was
sure he recognized her. The figure knelt.
Delicate knock.
  "Yes?"
  She slid the door back smiling, bowed and
waited.
  "Please come in, Koiko," he said,
delighted with this unexpected visit, all his
demons vanishing.
  She obeyed, closed the door and ran over
to him, her long, multipatterned kimono
sibilant, knelt again and pressed her cheek
to his hand, at once noticing the picture
poem. "Good evening, Sire."
  He laughed, and gave her a tender hug.
"To what do I owe this pleasure?"
  "I missed you," she said simply. "May I
see your poem?"
  "Of course."
  As she studied his work, he studied her, a
constant pleasure for him in the thirty-four days
she had been here within the castle walls.
Extraordinary clothes. Pure eggshell skin,
shining raven hair that, when loosed, would reach to her
waist, delicate nose, her teeth left white
as were his and not blackened in Court fashion.
  "Stupid!" his father had said to him as soon as
he could understand. "Why should we blacken our teeth
just because it's a Court custom started by an
Emperor centuries ago whose teeth were old and
rotting, who therefore decreed that dyed teeth were
superior to having teeth like animals! And why
use paints for our lips and cheeks as some still do
because another wanted to be a woman and not a man,
pretended to be one, and courtiers imitated
him-her to curry favor."
  Koiko was twenty-two years old, Tayu,
the highest possible grade of geisha in the
Willow World.
  Hearing whispers about her and curious, some
months ago he had sent for her, enjoyed her
company and then, two months ago, had ordered her
mama-san to submit a proposal for her
services. Correctly the proposal had gone
to his wife to deal with. His wife had written from
Dragon's Tooth, their castle home:

Beloved Husband, I have today concluded
satisfactory arrangements with the mama-san for
the Tayu Koiko of the House of Wisteria.
Sire, we considered it is better to have her
exclusivity, than a first option on her
services, and also safer as you are surrounded
by enemies. At your whim the contract is
renewable monthly, payment monthly in arrears
to ensure that her services are maintained to the very
high standard you should expect.
  Your Consort and I are pleased that you have
decided to have a toy, we were and are continually most
concerned for your health and safety. May I
compliment you on your choice, it is rumored that
Koiko is rare indeed.
  Your sons are well and happy, and your
daughter and myself. We send our everlasting
loyalty and long for your presence. Please keep
me closely advised as I must
direct our Paymaster to set aside funds
...

  Correctly his wife had not mentioned the amount,
nor would it concern him for that was a prime wifely
function: to manage and guard the family wealth and
pay all bills.
  Koiko looked up. "Your poem is
flawless, Yoshi-chan," she said and clapped her
hands, the "chan" an intimate diminutive.
  "You're flawless," he said hiding his pleasure
at her judgment. Apart from her unique
physical attributes, she was renown in Yedo
for the quality of her calligraphy, the beauty of
her poems, and shrewdness in art and politics.
  "I adore the way you write, and the poem, it
is superb. I adore the complexity of your mind,
particularly why you chose "when" and not perhaps
"now," and "twists" when a lesser man could
use "moves" or the more blatant "stirs"
which would give it sexual overtones. But the
placement of your final word, the final
"uneasily"--ah Yoshi-chan, how clever
to use that word last, an underneath word, perfect.
Your creation is superb and can be read a dozen
ways."
  "And what do you think I'm saying?"
  Her eyes lit. "First tell me if you intend
to keep it--to keep it openly, secretly or
to destroy it."
  "What is my intention?" he asked, enjoying
her.
  "If you keep it openly, or pretend to hide
it, or pretend it's secret, you plan it to be
read by others who, one way or another, will inform
your enemies, as you want."
  "And what will they think?"
  "All but the cleverest will presume that your
resolve is weakening, your fears are beginning
to overrun you."
  "And the others?"
  Koiko's eyes lost none of their amusement but
he saw them pick up an added glint. "Of your
chief adversaries," she said delicately,
"Sh@ogun Nobusada would interpret it that in your
inner mind you agree with him that you are not strong enough
to be a real threat, and he'll happily
postulate it will become easier and easier
to eliminate you the longer he waits. Anjo would
be consumed with envy at your prowess as a
poet and calligrapher and would sneer at the
"uneasily," believing it to be unworthy and
ill chosen, but the poem would obsess him,
worrying him, particularly if it was reported as
a secret document, until he would have
eighty-eight inner meanings all of which would increase
his implacable opposition to you."
  Her openness dazzled him. "And if I kept
it, secretly?"
  She laughed. "If you wanted to keep it
secret, then you would have burnt it at once and
never shown it to me. Sad to destroy such beauty,
so sad, Yoshi-chan, but necessary to a man in your
position."
  "Why? It's just a poem."
  "I believe this one is special. It is
too good. Such art comes from deep wells within. It
reveals. Revelation is the purpose of
poetry."
  "Go on."
  Her eyes seemed to change color as she
wondered how far she dared go, always testing
intellectual limits--to entertain and excite
her patron, if that was his interest. He noticed
the change but did not discern the reason.
  "For example," she said easily, "to the wrong
eyes it could be construed that your innermost thought was
really saying: "The power of my ancestor
namesake, Sh@ogun Toranaga Yoshi, is within
my grasp, begs to be used.""
  He watched her and she could not read his eyes.
Eeee, he was thinking, all his senses shrieking
danger. Am I so apparent? Perhaps this lady is
too perceptive to keep alive. "And the
Princess Yazu? What would she think?"
  "She's the cleverest of all, Yoshi-chan. But
then you know that. She would realize the meaning
instantly--if you have a special meaning." Again
her eyes could not be read.
  "And if as a present to you?"
  "Then this unworthy person would be filled with
joy to be given such a treasure--but in a
quandary, Yoshi-chan."
  "Quandary?"
  "It is too special, to give or to receive."
  Yoshi took his eyes off her and looked at his
work, very carefully. It was everything he desired,
he could never duplicate it. Then he considered
her, with equal finality. He watched his fingers
pick up the paper and hand it to her,
closing the trap.
  Reverently she received the paper with both hands and
bowed low. Intently she scrutinized it, wanting
the whole of it to be put indelibly in her
memory as the ink on the paper. A deep sigh.
Carefully she held the corner near the oil
flame. "With your permission, Yoshi-sama,
please?" she said formally, looking at him, eyes
steady, hand steady.
  "Why?" he asked, astonished.
  "Too dangerous for you to leave such thoughts
alive."
  "And if I refuse?"
  "Then, please excuse me, I must decide
for you."
  "Then decide."
  At once she lowered the paper into the flame.
It caught and flared up. Deftly she twisted it
until only a tiny scrap was still burning, the ash
still in one piece, carefully balanced it on
another sheet until the flame died. Her fingers
were long and delicate, fingernails perfection. In
silence they folded the paper containing the ashes
into an ogami and put it back on the table. The
paper now resembled a carp.
  When Koiko looked up again her eyes were
filled with tears and his affection went out to her. "So
sorry, please excuse me," she said, her
voice breaking, "But too dangerous for you ... so
sad to have to destroy such beauty, I wanted so very
much to keep it. So very sad but too dangerous
..."
  Tenderly, he took her in his arms, knowing that
what she had done was the only solution, for him,
and for her, awed by her insight in discerning his original
intent: that he had planned to hide it, designed
to be found and passed on to all those she named,
particularly the Princess Yazu.
  Koiko's right, I can see that now. Yazu would
have seen through my ploy and read my real thoughts: that
her influence over Nobusada must vanish, or
I am a dead man. Isn't that just another way
of saying, "Power of my ancestor ..." But for
her I might have put my head on their spike!
  "Don't cry, little one," he murmured,
sure now that she could be trusted.
  And while she allowed herself to be gentled and then
warmed and then to warm him she was thinking within her third
heart, her most secret heart--the first for all the
world to see, the second only opened
to innermost family, the third never never never
revealed to anyone--in this secret place she was
sighing silently with relief that she had passed
another test, for test it surely was.
  Too dangerous for him to keep such treason
alive, but much more dangerous for me to have it in my
possession. Oh yes, my beautiful patron,
it is easy to adore you, to laugh and play games
with you, to pretend ecstasy when you enter me--and
godlike to remember that at the end of each day, every
day I have earned one koku. Think of that,
Koiko-chan! One koku a day, for every day, for
being part of the most exciting game on earth, with the
most exalted name on earth, with a young, handsome
astonishing man of great culture whose stalk is the
best I have ever experienced ... and yet at the
same time to earn more wealth than any, ever before.
  Her hands and lips and body were responding
adroitly, closing, opening, opening further,
receiving him, guiding him, helping him, an
exquisitely fine-tuned instrument for him to play
upon, allowing herself to brink, pretending ecstasy
perfectly, pretending to plunge again and again but
never plunging--too important to retain her
energies and wits, for he was a man of many
appetites--enjoying the contest, never hurrying but
always pressing forward, now teetering him on the
crevasse, letting him go and pulling him back,
letting him go, pulling back, letting go in a
seizure of relief.
  Quiet now. His sleeping weight not
unpleasant, stoically borne, careful not to move
lest she disturb his peace. Well satisfied with
her art as she knew he had been with his. Her
last, most secret, exhilarating thought before
drifting into sleep was, I wonder how
Katsumata, Hiraga and their shishi friends will
interpret, "Sword of my fathers ..."

                 

               KY@OTO

    Monday, 29th September:
  A few miles south of Ky@oto in
twilight, a vicious rearguard skirmish was in
progress between fleeing Satsuma troops and
Choshu forces of Lord Ogama who had recently
seized control of the Palace Gates from them. The
Satsuma sword master,
Katsumata, the secret shishi, supported by a
hundred mounted samurai, was leading the fight
to protect the escape of Lord Sanjiro and their
main Satsuma force a few miles southwards.
They were heavily outnumbered. The country was open,
wind blustering with a heavy stench of human manure
from the fields and above an ominous buildup of
storm clouds.
  Again Katsumata lead a furious charge that
broke through the forward ranks towards the standard of the
Choshu daimyo, Ogama, also mounted, but they were
forced back bloodily, with heavy losses as
reinforcements rushed to protect their leader.
  "All troops advance!" Ogama shouted.
He was twenty-eight, a heavyset angry man
wearing light, bamboo and metal armor and war
helmet, his sword out and bloodied. "Bypass
these dogs! Go around them! I want Sanjiro's
head!"
  At once aides rushed off to relay his
orders.
  Three or four miles away, Lord
Sanjiro and the remnants of his force were hurrying
for the coast and Osaka, twenty-odd miles
away, to seek boats to carry them home to the
South Island of Ky@ush@u, and the safety of their
capital, Kagoshima, four hundred sea
miles southwest.
  In all there were about eight hundred fighters,
well equipped and fanatic samurai
desperate to rush back to join the fight, still
smarting from their defeat and being forced out of Ky@oto
a week ago. Ogama had staged a sudden night
attack, ringing their barracks and setting fire to the
buildings, abrogating the solemn agreements between
them.
  With many losses the Satsumas had fought their
way out of the city to the village of Fushimi where
Sanjiro angrily regrouped, Choshu
detachments dogging them. "We are trapped."
  One of his captains said, "Lord, I
propose an immediate counterattack, towards
Ky@oto."
  Katsumata said emphatically, "Too
dangerous, too many troops against us, they will
overwhelm us. Sire, you will alienate all
daimyos and further frighten the Court. I
propose you offer Ogama a truce--if he
allows an orderly withdrawal."
  "On what grounds?"'
  "As part of the truce you accept that his forces will
be custodians of the Gates--his forces, not the
Tosa, and that will sow further dissension between them."
  "I cannot accept that," Sanjiro had said,
shaking with rage that Ogama had duped him.
"Even if I did he will not consent, why should
he? We are in his grasp. He can piss all
over us. If I were him I would fall on us here
before midday."
  "Yes, Lord, he will--unless we forestall
him. We can by this ruse, he's not a real fighter
like you--his troops are not filled with zeal like
ours, nor are they as well trained. He only
succeeded against us because he fell on us by night in a
filthy betrayal. Remember, his alliance with the
Tosa is precarious. He must consolidate his
hold of the Gates and has insufficient troops
to meet every problem for the next few weeks. He
has to organize and get reinforcements without
provoking opposition. And soon the Bakufu must
come back in force to take back the Gates as is
their right."
  By Toranaga Edict, all daimyos
visiting Ky@oto were limited to five hundred
guards, all of whom had to live under severe
restrictions in their own fief barracks, built
by decree without defenses. The same Edict
allowed Sh@ogunate forces to number more than all
the others together. Over the centuries of peace the
Bakufu had allowed these laws to languish. In
recent years, Tosa, Choshu and Satsumas
daimyos--depending on personal strength--had
twisted the bureaucracy to increase their numbers
until forced to send the added warriors home.
  "Ogama is not a fool, he will never let
me escape," Sanjiro said. "I would
spike him if I had him trapped."
  "He is not a fool, but he can be
manipulated." Then Katsumata dropped his
voice. "Added to the Gates, you could agree that,
if or when there is a Convention of Daimyos, you
would support his claims to head the Council of
Elders."
  Sanjiro exploded, "Never! He has
to know I would never agree to that. Why should he
believe such nonsense?"'
  "Because he is Ogama. Because he has
fortified his Shimonoseki Straits with dozens of
cannon from his not-so-secret, Dutch-built
weapons factory and believes therefore,
rightly, he can stop gai-jin ships from using it at
his whim, yet still be safe against them. That he
alone, he thinks, can put into practice the
Emperor's wish to expel the gai-jin, that he
alone can restore the trapping of power to the
Emperor--why shouldn't he claim the big
prize, tair@o--Dictator?"'
  "The Land will be torn apart before that."
  "The last reason he would welcome a
possible truce is because, Sire, never before, has
he possessed the Gates--isn't he an
upstart, a usurper, isn't his line ordinary,"
Katsumata said with a sneer, "not ancient or
exalted like yours. A further reason: he will
accept the truce you offer because you will offer it to be
permanent."
  In the rumble of astonished, angry opposition,
Sanjiro had stared at his counselor, astounded
at the vast range of concessions Katsumata
proposed. Not understanding, but knowing Katsumata
too well, he dismissed the others.
  "What is behind all this?"' he asked
impatiently. "Ogama must know any truce
is only good until I am safe behind my
mountains where I will mobilize all Satsuma and
then march on Ky@oto to repossess my rights,
avenge the insult and take his head. Why such
nonsense from you?"'
  "Because you are in mortal danger like never before,
Sire. You are trapped. There are spies
amongst us. I need time to organize boats in
Osaka, and I have a battle plan."
  At length Sanjiro had said, "Very well.
Negotiate."
  The negotiations had so far lasted six days.
  During this time Sanjiro placidly stayed at
Fushimi, but with spies on all roads to and from
Ky@oto. As a measure of mutual trust,
Sanjiro had agreed to move into a less
defensible position, and Ogama had withdrawn all
but a token force athwart the escape route. Then
both waited for the other to make a mistake.
  With supreme power in Ky@oto, however
tenuous, Ogama, supported by more than a thousand
samurai, seemed to be content to tighten his grasp
on the Gates, cultivating daimyos and, more
particularly, courtiers who were sympathetic. These
Ogama persuaded to approach the Emperor,
asking Him to "request" the immediate resignation
of Anjo and the Council of Elders,
to convene a Convention of Daimyos who would be given
the power to appoint a new Council of Elders--
with himself as tair@o--who would rule until
Sh@ogun Nobusada became of age, and at one
stroke replacing all Toranaga adherents in
the Bakufu.
  To Ogama's delight he was told the news his
cannon had fired on gai-jin ships had greatly
pleased the Emperor, and that, together with Sanjiro's
proffered truce and extraordinary concessions, had
further bolstered his influence at Court. "The
truce is accepted," he had imperiously
told Katsumata yesterday. "We will ratify
the agreement, seven days from now, here in my
headquarters. Then you can retire
to Kagoshima."
  But this morning had come the astonishing word of
Sh@ogun Nobusada's proposed visit. At
once Sanjiro sent for Katsumata. "What
could possess Anjo and Yoshi to agree? Are
they mad? Whatever happens they lose."
  "I agree, Sire, but this makes your
position even more dangerous. With Ogama holding
the Gates, therefore access to the Emperor, any
enemy of Ogama is an enemy of the Emperor."
  "Obvious! What can I do? What do you
suggest?"'
  "Immediately send Ogama a letter suggesting a
meeting in three days to discuss the ramifications
of the visit--he must be as astonished as any
daimyo. Meanwhile tonight, after dark we implement
the battle plan."
  "We can't escape without Ogama knowing, there
are spies all around us, and his troops within easy
distance. The moment he hears we're breaking camp
he will fall on us."
  "Yes, but we leave the camp exactly as it
is, taking only our weapons--I can
outmaneuver him, I know him."
  Angrily Sanjiro had said, "If that is
so why didn't you sniff out the surprise
attack, eh?"'
  Oh but I did, Katsumata could have said, but
it suited me better that Ogama temporarily
holds the Gates. Didn't we escape his
trap without much trouble? Ogama will never be able
to deal with the Court, hostile daimyos, the
Tosa, Sh@ogun Nobusada's visit or the
Princess Yazu--not that Nobusada will arrive,
Ogama will be held responsible for his
death also.
  "So sorry, Sire," he had said
pretending an apology, "I am finding out why
your spies failed you. Heads will roll."
  "Good."
  Soon after dark Katsumata sent specially
trained men who quietly decimated the
unsuspecting Choshu troop spying on them.
Then, following Katsumata's battle plan,
except for him and his hundred cavalry,
Sanjiro and the regiment hurried south with orders
to leave a hundred men every three ri to join up with
him as he fell back, following them.
Confidently Katsumata settled into ambush
across the Ky@oto road. He was sure that if he
could survive until dawn, enticing the Choshu
into a running fight, when they would probably break
off the fight and return to Ky@oto to reinforce their
position there, leaving only a token force in
pursuit. Rumors were rife that Ogama's
alliances were already falling apart, the rift widened
by lies spread by Katsumata's covert
allies.
  He had been astonished to find Ogama leading
the chase and that they had caught up with them so quickly.
Karma.

  "Attack!" Katsumata shouted and again he
whirled his horse from feigned flight. At once
his seemingly scattered cavalry joined
into violent phalanxes and burst through their
opponents who were sent reeling back in disorder,
the cold wet air heavy with the smell of sweat and
fear and blood burning his nostrils. Men died
to the left and right, his and theirs, but he fought his way
through and now the path was almost clear to Ogama but
once more he was foiled so he broke off and fled
--really retreated this time--those alive following
him. Of the hundred only twenty remained.
  "Bring up our reserve! Five hundred
koku for Katsumata's head," Ogama shouted,
"a thousand for Lord Sanjiro!"
  "Sire!" One of his most experienced
captains was pointing upwards. Unnoticed in the
excitement, the storm clouds had taken most of the
sky and threads reached out for the moon. "So sorry,
but the road back to Ky@oto is difficult and
we don't know if those cunning dogs have another
ambush waiting."
  Ogama thought a moment. "Cancel the
reserve! Take fifty horsemen and harry them
to death. If you bring me either head, I will make you
a general, with ten thousand koku. Break off the
battle!"
  Instantly his captains hurried away, shouting
orders. Ogama sourly peered into the gathering dark
where Katsumata and his men had vanished. "By my
ancestors," he muttered, "when I'm
tair@o, Satsuma will be a Choshu
protectorate, the Treaties will be cancelled and
no gai-jin ship will ever pass my Straits!"
Then he turned his horse and, with his personal
guards, spurred gladly for Ky@oto. And
destiny.

  That same evening in the French Legation at
Yokohama the party and recital Seratard had
arranged in Angelique's honor was a great
success. The chef had surpassed himself: fresh
bread, platters of stewed oysters, cold
lobster, shrimps and prawns, baked local fish
spiced with ginger and garlic served with leeks from his
own garden, and tarte au pomme, the dried
apples from France only used on special
occasions. Champagne, La Doucette, and a
Margaux from his home village of which he was very
proud.
  After dinner and cigars, great applause had
heralded Andr`e Poncin, an accomplished though
reluctant pianist, more applause after each
piece, and now, almost midnight and after three
encores, there was a standing ovation as the last lovely
chord of a Beethoven sonata died away.
  "Marvelous ..."
  "Superb ..."
  "Oh Andr`e," Angelique said breathlessly
in French from her place of honor near the
piano, her mind cleansed of the lurking misery
by his music. "It was beautiful, thank you so very
much." Her fan fluttered charmingly, eyes and
face perfection, new crinoline over hooped
petticoats, low-cut, shoulders bare, the fine
green silk cascading in gathered tiers
accentuating her wisp of waist.
  "Merci, Mademoiselle," Poncin
replied. He got up and raised his glass, his
eyes barely veiled. "@a toi!"
  "Merci, Monsieur," she said, then once
more turned back to Seratard, surrounded
by Norbert Greyforth, Jamie
McFay, Dmitri and other traders, everyone in
evening dress with ruffled silk shirts, vivid
waistcoats and cravats--some new but most old,
crumpled and hastily pressed because she was to be
there. Some French army and naval officers,
uniforms heavy with braid, dress swords added
to the unaccustomed splendor, British military
equally like peacocks.
  Two of the other three women in the Settlement
were in the crowded, oil- and candle-lit room,
Mabel Swann and Victoria Lunkchurch.
Both stout, in their early twenties and childless,
wives of traders, both cross-eyed with
jealousy, their husbands tethered sweatily beside them.
"'Tis time, Mr. Swann," Mabel Swann
said with a sour sniff. "Yus. Prayers n'bed
with a nice English cup of tea."
  "If you're tired, my dear, you an Vic--"
  "Now!"
  "Thee, too, Barnaby," Victoria
Lunkchurch said, her Yorkshire accent as heavy
as her hips, "and put dirty thoughts out of thy
head, lad, afore I belt thee proper!"
  "Who me? Wot thorts?"
  "Those thorts, thee'n that foreign baggage there,
may God forgive thee," she said with even more
venom. "Out!"
  No one missed them or knew they had left.
All were concentrating the guest of honor, trying
to get nearer, or if they were within the circle,
to stop being elbowed out.
  "A splendid evening, Henri," Angelique
was saying.
  "It's only because of you. By gracing us you make
everything better." Seratard mouthed gallant
platitudes while he was thinking, what a pity
you're not already married and therefore ripe for a
liaison with a man of culture. Poor girl
to have to endure an immature bovine Scot,
however rich. I would like to be your first real lover--
it will be a joy to teach you.
  "You smile, Henri?" she said, suddenly
aware that she had better be careful of this man.
  "I was just thinking how perfect your future will be
and that made me happy."
  "Ah, how kind you are!"
  "I think th--"
  "Miss Angelique, if I may be so
bold, we're having a race meet, this
Saturday," Norbert Greyforth
broke in, furious that Seratard was
monopolizing her, disgusted that the man had the
rudeness to speak French that he did not understand,
detesting him and everything French, except
Angelique. "We're, there's going to be a
new race, in, er, in your honor. We've
decided to call it the Angel Cup, eh
Jamie?"
  "Yes," Jamie McFay said, both of them
Stewards of the Jockey Club, equally under her
spell. "We, well we decided it will be the
last race of the day and Struan's are providing
prize money: twenty guineas for the cup. You'll
present the prize, Miss Angelique?"
  "Oh yes, with pleasure, if Mr. Struan
approves."
  "Oh, yes of course." McFay had already
asked Struan's permission, but he and every man within
hearing wondered about the implications of that remark,
though all bets against an engagement were off. Even
in private, Struan had given him no clue
though McFay had felt duty bound to report the
rumors.
  "None of their rotten business, Jamie.
None."
  He had agreed but his disquiet increased. The
captain off an incoming merchantman, an old
friend, had slipped him a letter from Malcolm's mother
asking for a confidential report: I wish to know
everything that has happened since this Richaud
woman arrived in Yokohama, Jamie.
Everything, rumour, facts, gossip and I need
not stress that this is to be a serious secret between
us.
  Bloody hell, Jamie thought, I'm
committed by holy oath to serve the tai-pan whoever
he is and now his mother wants ... but then a mother
has rights, doesn't she? Not necessarily, but
Mrs. Struan has because she's Mrs. Struan
and, well you're used to doing what she wants.
Haven't you done her bidding, her requests and
suggestions, for years?
  For the love of God, stop fooling yourself,
Jamie, hasn't she truly been running
Culum and Struan's for years, and neither you nor
anyone has ever wanted to face the fact openly?
  "That's right," he muttered, shocked by the thought
he had been afraid to bring to the front of his
mind. Suddenly uncomfortable, he hastily
covered his lapse, but everyone was still
concentrating on Angelique.
  Except Norbert. "What's right,
Jamie?" he asked under the buzz of conversation, his
smile flat.
  "Everything, Norbert. Great evening, eh?"
To his great relief, Angelique diverted them
both.
  "Good night, good night, Henri, gentlemen,"
she said over general protests. "I'm sorry but
I must see my patient before I sleep." She
held out her hand. With practiced elegance,
Seratard kissed it, Norbert, Jamie and the
others awkwardly and before any one else could
volunteer, Andr`e Poncin said, "Perhaps I
may escort you to your home?"
  "Of course, why not? Your music
transported me."
  The night was cool and overcast but pleasant
enough, her woolen shawl decoratively around her
shoulders, the bottom ruffle of her wide,
hooped skirt dragging carelessly in the dirt of the
wooden sidewalk--so necessary during the summer
rains that transformed all roads into bogs.
Only one small part of her mind dragging with it.
  "Andr`e, your music is wonderful, oh how
I wish I could play like you," she said, meaning it.
  "It's only practice, just practice."
  They strolled along towards the brightly lit
Struan Building, speaking companionably in
French, Andr`e very aware of the envious glances of the
men streaming across the street to the Club--
boisterous, packed, and inviting--warmed by her, not with
lust or passion or desire, just with her company and
happy chattering that hardly ever required an
answer.
  Last night at Seratard's "French" dinner
in a private room in the Yokohama Hotel,
he had sat beside her and found her youth and seeming
frivolity refreshing, her love and knowledge of Paris,
the restaurants, theatres, the talk of her young
friends, laughing about them and strolling or riding in the
Bois, all the excitement of the Second
Empire filling him with nostalgia, reminding him
of his university days and how much he, too,
missed home.
  Too many years in Asia, China and here.
  Curious this girl is so much like my own
daughter. Marie's same age, birthdays the
same month, July, same eyes, same
coloring ...
  He corrected himself: Perhaps like Marie. How
many years since I broke with Fran@coise and
left the two of them in her family pension near the
Sorbonne I boarded in? Seventeen. How
many years since I last saw them? Ten.
Merde, I should never have married,
Fran@coise enceinte or not. I was the fool,
not her, at least she remarried and runs the pension.
But Marie?
  The sound of the waves took his vision to the sea.
A stray gull cawed overhead. Not far offshore
were the riding lights of their anchored flagship and that
broke the spell, reminding him and concentrating his
mind.
  Ironic, this slip of a girl now becomes an
important pawn in the Great Game, France
versus Britain. Ironic but life. Do I
leave it until tomorrow, or the next day, or deal
the cards as we agreed, Henri and I?
  "Ah," she was saying, her fan fluttering,
"I feel so happy tonight, Andr`e, your music
has given me so much, has taken me to the
Op@era, has lifted me until I can smell
the perfume of Paris ..."
  In spite of himself he was beguiled. Is it
her, or because she reminds me of what Marie
might have been? I don't know, but never mind,
Angelique, tonight I'll leave you in your happy
balloon. Tomorrow is soon enough.
  Then his nostrils caught a suggestion of her
perfume, Vie de Camille, reminding him of the
phial he had acquired from Paris with such
difficulty for his musume, Hana--the Flower
--and sudden rage swept away his impulse
to kindness.
  There was no one within hearing distance, most of the
High Street empty. Even so, he kept his
voice down. "Sorry to tell you but I've some
private news you should have. There's no way
to break it easily but your father visited Macao
some weeks ago and gambled heavily, and lost."
He saw the swift pallor. His heart went out
to her but he continued as he and Seratard had
planned. "Sorry."
  "Heavily, Andr`e? What does that mean?"
The words were barely audible and he saw her staring
at him wide-eyed, rigid in the lee of a
building.
  "He has lost everything, his business, your
funds."
  She gasped. "Everything? My funds too?
But he can't!"
  "Sorry, he can, and has. He's within the
law, you're his daughter, an unmarried woman,
apart from being a minor, he's your father with
jurisdiction over you and everything you possess but of
course you know that. Sorry. Do you have other
money?" he asked, knowing she did not.
  "Sorry?" She shivered and fought to make her
mind work clearly, the suddenness of knowing that the
second of her great terrors was now a reality and
common knowledge tore asunder her carefully,
self-generated cocoon. "How, how do you know
all this?" she stammered, groping for air. "My,
my funds are mine ... he promised."
  "He changed his mind. And Hong Kong's a
village--there are no secrets in Hong Kong,
Angelique, no secrets there, or here. Today
a message arrived from Hong Kong, couriered from
a business partner. He sent the details--he was
in Macao at the time and witnessed the debacle."
He kept his voice friendly and concerned as a good
friend should be, but telling only half the truth.
"He and I, we, we own some of your father's
paper, loans from last year and still unpd."
  Another fear slashed into her. "Doesn't ...
my father doesn't pay his bills?"
  "No, I'm afraid not."
  In anguish she was thinking of her aunt's letter and
knew for certain now that her uncle's loan had not
been repaid either and he was in jail because ... perhaps
because of me, she wanted to shout, trying to keep her
balance, wishing this was all a dream oh God oh
God what am I going to do?
  "I want you to know if I can help, please
tell me."
  Abruptly her voice became shrill.
"Help me? You've destroyed my peace--if
what you say is true. Help me? Why did you
tell me this now, why why why when I was so
happy?"
  "Better you should know at once. Better I
tell you, than an enemy."
  Her face twisted. "Enemy, what enemy?
Why should I have enemies? I've done nothing
to anyone, nothing nothing noth--" The tears began
flooding. In spite of himself, he held her for a
moment, compassionately, then put both hands on
her shoulders and shook her.
  "Stop it," he said, letting his
voice sharpen. "My God, stop it, don't you
understand, I'm trying to help you!" Several men were
approaching on the other side of the street but he
saw that they were weaving and concerned only with themselves.
No one else nearby, only men making for the
club well down the street behind them, he and she
protected by the building's shadow. Again he shook
her and she moaned, "You're hurting me!" but the
tears ceased and she came back to herself.
  Partly to herself, he thought coldly, this same
process repeated a hundred times before with varying
degrees of twisted truths and violence, with other
innocents he needed to use for the betterment of
France, men so much easier to deal with than women.
Men you just kicked in the balls or threatened to cut
them off, or stuck needles ... But women?
Distasteful to treat women so.
  "You're surrounded by enemies, Angelique.
There're many who don't want you to marry
Struan, his mother will fight you every way she--"
  "I've never said we were going to be married, it
... it's a rumor, a rumor, that's all!"
  "Merde! Of course it's true! He's
asked you, hasn't he?" He shook her again, his
fingers rough. "Hasn't he?"
  "You're hurting me, Andr`e, yes, yes
he's asked me."
  He gave her a handkerchief, deliberately
more gentle. "Here, dry your eyes, there's not much
time."
  Meekly she obeyed, began to cry, stopped
herself. "Why'reyousoawfulllll?"
  "I'm the only real friend you have here--I'm
truly on your side, ready to help, the only
real friend you can trust--I'm the only friend you have,
I swear it, the only one who can help you."
Normally he would add fervently, I swear
by God, but he judged her hooked, reserving that for
later. "Better you hear the truth secretly.
Now you've time to prepare. The news won't
arrive for at least a week, that gives you time
to make your betrothal solemn and official."
  "What?"
  "Struan's a gentleman, isn't he?" With
an effort he covered the sneer. "An English,
sorry a Scottish, a British gentleman.
Aren't they proudly men of their word? Eh? Once
the promise is public he can't withdraw whether
you're a pauper or not, whatever your father has
done, whatever his mother says."
  I know I know, she wanted to scream. But
I'm a woman and I have to wait, I've been
waiting and now it's too late. Is it? Oh
Blessed Mother, help me! "I don't ...
don't think Malcolm will blame me for my father
or, or listen to his mother."
  "I'm afraid he has to, Angelique.
Have you forgotten Malcolm Struan is a minor
too, however much he's tai-pan. His twenty-first
birthday's not till May next year. Until
then she can put all sorts of legal restraints
on him, even annul a betrothal under English
law." He was not completely sure of this but it
sounded reasonable and was true under French law.
  "She could put restraints on you too, perhaps
take you to court," he added so sadly,
"Struan's are powerful in Asia, it's almost their
domain. She could have you hauled into court--you know
what they say about judges, any judges, eh?
She could have you dragged before a magistrate, accuse
you of being a coquette, a deceiver, just after his money
or worse. She could paint a nasty picture
to the judge, you in the dock and defenseless, your father
a gambling, bankrupt ne'er-do-well, your
uncle in Debtor's Prison, you penniless,
an adventuress."
  Her face became haggard. "How do you know about
Uncle Michel? Who are you?"
  "There are no tricks, Angelique," he
said easily. "How many French citizens are in
Asia? Not many, none like you, and people like to gossip.
Me, I'm Andr`e Poncin, China trader,
Japan trader. You've nothing to fear from me. I
want nothing but your friendship and trust and to help."
  "How? I'm beyond help."
  "No you're not," he said softly, watching her
carefully. "You love him, don't you? You would be
the best wife a man can have given the chance, wouldn't
you?"
  "Yes, yes of course ..."
  "Then press him, beguile him, persuade
him, any way you can to make your betrothal
public. I can guide you perhaps." Now, at
last, he saw that she was really hearing him, really
understanding him. Gently he delivered the coup de
grace. "A wise woman, and you are wise as you
are beautiful, would get married quickly. Very
quickly."

                                  
  Struan was reading, the oil lamp on the table
beside his bed giving enough light, the door to her room
ajar. His bed was comfortable and he was engrossed in the
story, his silken nightshirt enhancing the color
of his eyes, his face still pale and thin with none of
its former strength. On the bedside table was a
sleeping draft, his pipe and tobacco and matches
and water laced with a little whisky: "Good for you,
Malcolm," Babcott had said. "It's the
best nighttime medicine you could have, taken weak.
Better than the tincture."
  "Without that I'm awake all night and feel
dreadful."
  "It's seventeen days now since the accident,
Malcolm, it's time to stop, Malcolm. Really
to stop, not good to rely on medicine to sleep.
Best we stop it for good."
  "I tried that before and it didn't work. I'll
stop in a day or two. ..."
  Curtains were drawn against the night, the room
cozy, the ticktock of the ornate Swiss
timepiece peaceful. It was almost one o'clock, and the
book, The Murders in the Rue Morgue,
was one that Dmitri had loaned him this morning
saying: "Think you'll like it, Malc, it's what
they call a detective story--Edgar Allan
Poe's one of our best writers, sorry was,
he died in '49, the year after the Gold Rush.
I've a collection of his books and poems if
you like this one."
  "Thanks, you're very kind. Good of you to drop
by so often. But why so glum today, Dmitri?"'
  "News from home is bad. My folks ...
it's all bad, Malc, all mixed up,
cousins, brothers, uncles on both sides.
Hell, you don't want to hear about that. Listen,
I've lots of other books, a whole library
in fact."
  "Go on about your family, please," he had
said, the pain of the day beginning. "Really, I'd like
to hear."
  "All right, sure. Well, when my
granddaddy and his family came over from Russia,
from the Crimea--did I tell you our family were
Cossacks--they settled in a little place
called Far Hills in New Jersey, farmed
there till the War of 1812--my granddad was
killed in it--great place for raising horses,
too, and we prospered. The family stayed in
New Jersey mostly, though two of his
sons moved south, to Richmond Virginia. When
I was in the army, oh fifteen odd years ago--
it was just the Union Army then, not North or
South. I joined the cavalry and stayed for five
years, spent most of my time south, south and west,
the Indian Wars if you could call them that. Spent
part of the time in Texas, a year while it was still a
republic helping them blow off their Indians,
then a couple after she joined the Union in '45,
we were stationed out of Austin. That's where I met my
wife, Emilie--she also comes from Richmond--
her Pa was a colonel in Supplies. My
that's pretty country, around Austin, but more so all
around Richmond. Emilie ... can I get you
anything?"'
  "No, no thanks, Dmitri, the pain will
pass. Go on, will you ... talking, your talking
helps me a lot."
  "Sure, all right. My Emilie,
Emilie Clemm was her name--she was a distant
cousin of Poe's wife, Virginia Clemm, which
I didn't find out till later but which's why
I've a collection of his works." Dmitri had
laughed. "Poe was a great writer but a bigger
drunk and cocksman. Seems like all writers
are bums, drunks and or fornicators--take
Melville--maybe that's what makes them
writers, me I can't write a letter without
sweating. How about you?"'
  "Oh, I can write letters--have to, and keep
a journal like most people. You were saying about this
Poe?"'
  "I was going to tell you he married Virginia
Clemm when she was thirteen--she was also his cousin,
imagine that!--and they lived happily ever after but not
very if what was reported in the newspapers and
gossip was true--he was a randy son of a bitch
though she didn't seem to mind. My Emilie
wasn't thirteen but eighteen and a Southern belle
if ever there was one. We were married when I got out
of the army and joined Cooper-Tillman in
Richmond--they wanted to expand into armaments and
ammunition for export to Asia which I'd learned
a lot about, that and shooting Indians and horse
trading. Old Jeff Cooper figured that guns
and other goods outward bound from Norfolk
Virginia would go well with opium up the China
coast, silver and tea inbound to Norfolk--but, you
know Jeff. Cooper-Tillman and Struan's
are old friends, eh?"'
  "Yes, and I hope it remains so. Go
on."
  "Nothing much more, or everything. Over the years,
others in the family moved down south and spread
out. My ma was from Alabama, I have two
brothers and a sister, all younger than me. Now
Billy's with the North, New Jersey 1st
Cavalry, and my little brother's Janny--named
after my granddaddy, Janov Syborodin,
Janny's cavalry too but with the 3rd
Virginian, Advance Scouts. It's all
crap--those two know crap about war and fighting and
they'll get themselves killed, sure as hell."
  "You ... are you going to go back?"'
  "Don't know, Malc. Every day I think
yes, every night yes and every morning no, don't
want to start killing family whatever side I'm
on."
  "Why did you leave and come to this godforsaken part
of the world?"'
  "Emilie died. She got scarlet fever--
there was an epidemic and she was one of the unlucky
ones. That was nine years ago--we were just about to have a
kid."
  "What rotten luck!"
  "Yes. You and me, we've both had our
share. ..."
  Struan was so concentrated in his mystery book that
he did not hear the outside door to her suite
softly open and close, nor the lightness of her
tiptoeing, nor notice her peer in for an
instant, then disappear. In a moment there was an
almost imperceptible click as her inner, bedroom
door closed.
  He looked up. Now listening intently. She
had said that she would look in but if he was asleep
she would not disturb him. Or if she was tired she
would go straight to bed, quiet as a mouse, and see
him in the morning. "Don't worry, darling,"
he had said happily. "Just have a good time,
I'll see you at breakfast. Sleep well and
know I love you."
  "I love you too, ch@eri. Sleep
well."
  The book was resting in his lap. With an effort
he sat upright and swung his legs over the side
of the bed. That part was just bearable. But not getting up.
Getting up was still beyond him. His heart was pounding and
he felt nauseated and lay back. Still, a little
better than yesterday. Got to push,
whatever Babcott says, he told himself
grimly, rubbing his stomach. Tomorrow I'll try
again, three times. Perhaps it's just as well. I'd
want to stay with her. God help me I would have
to.
  When he felt better he began to read once
more, glad for the book, but now the story did not
absorb him as before, his attention wandered, and his mind
started to intermix the story with pictures of her about
to be murdered, and corpses, him rushing
to protect her, other glimpses becoming ever more
erotic.
  At length he put the book away, marking the
place with a page she had given him, one from her
journal. Wonder what she writes in it, knowing
her to be as diligent as anyone. About me and her?
Her and me?
  Very tired now. His hand reached for the lamp to turn
the wick down, then stopped. The little wineglass with
sleep in it beckoned. His fingers trembled.
  Babcott's right, I don't need it
anymore.
  Firmly he doused the light and lay back and
closed his eyes, praying for her and his family and
that his mother would bless them, and then for himself. Oh
God, help me get better--I'm afraid,
very afraid.
  But sleep would not take him. Turning or
trying to gain comfort hurt him, reminding him of the
Tokaid@o and Canterbury. Half asleep
half awake, his mind buzzing with the book, the
macabre setting and how would it finish? Adding all
kinds of pictures. And more pictures, some
bad, some beautiful, some vivid, every little movement
to get more comfortable bringing blossoms of pain.
  Time passed, another hour or minutes, and then
he drank the elixir and relaxed contentedly,
knowing that soon he would be floating on gossamer,
her hand on him, his hand on her, there on her
breasts and everywhere, hers equally knowingly, equally
welcomed, not only hands.

                 

    Friday, 3rd October:
  Just after dawn Angelique got out of bed and
sat at her dressing table in the bay windows
overlooking the High Street and harbor. She was
very tired. In the locked drawer was her journal.
It was dull red leather and also locked.
She slid the little key from its hiding place,
unlocked it, then dipped her pen in ink and wrote
in it, more as a friend to a friend--her journal these days
seemed her only friend, the only one she felt
safe with:

  "Friday, 3rd: another bad night and I
feel ghastly. It's four days since Andr`e
gave me the terrible news about Father. Since then
I have been unable to write anything, to do anything,
have locked my doors and "taken to my bed"
feigning a fever, apart from once or twice a
day going to visit my Malcolm to allay his
anxiety, closing the door to everyone except my
maid who I hate, though I agreed to see
Jamie once, and Andr`e.
  "Poor Malcolm, he was beside himself with
worry the first day when I did not appear nor would
open my door, and insisted that he be carried on a
stretcher into my boudoir to see me--even if they
had to break down the door. I managed to forestall
him, forcing myself to go to him, saying that I was all
right, it was just a bad headache, that, no, I did
not need Babcott, that he was not to worry about my
tears, telling him privately that it was just "that time
of the month" and sometimes the flow was great and sometimes
my days irregular. He was embarrassed beyond
belief that I had mentioned my period! Beyond
belief! Almost as though he knew nothing about this
female function, at times I don't understand him
at all although he's so kind and considerate, the
most I've ever known. Another worry: in
truth, the poor man is not much better and daily
in so much pain I want to cry."

  Blessed Mother give me strength! she thought. Then
there's the other. I try not to worry but I'm
frantic. The day approaches. Then I'll be
free from that terror, but not from penury.
  She began to write again.

"It's so difficult to be private in the
Struan building, however comfortable and pleasant but
the Settlement is awful. Not a hairdresser,
not a ladies' dressmaker (though I have a
Chinese tailor who is very adept at copying
what already exists), no hat maker--I haven't
yet tried the shoemaker, there's nowhere to go, nothing
to do--oh how I long for Paris, but how can I ever
live there now? Would Malcolm move
there if we married? Never. And if we don't
marry ... how can I pay even a ticket
home? How? I've asked myself a thousand times
without an answer."

  Her gaze left the paper and went to the window and
to the ships in the bay. I wish I was on one of
them, going home, wish I'd never come here. I
hate this place ... What if .... If
Malcolm doesn't marry me I'll have to marry
someone else but I've no dowry, nothing. Oh
God, this isn't what I'd hoped. If I
managed to get home, I've still got no money,
poor aunt and uncle ruined. Colette
hasn't got any to lend, I don't know anyone
rich or famous enough to marry, or far enough up in
society so I could safely become a
mistress. I could go on the stage but there it's
essential to have a patron to bribe managers and
playwrights, and pay for all the clothes and jewels
and carriages and a palatial house for soirees
--of course you have to bed the patron, at his whim not
yours, until you are rich and famous enough and that
takes time, and I don't have the connections, or have
any friends who do. Oh dear, I'm so confused.
I think I am going to cry again. ...
  She buried her face in her arms, the tears
spilling, careful not to make too much noise lest
her maid hear her and started wailing, creating a
scene as on the first day. Her nightdress was
cream silk, a pale green dressing gown around
her shoulders, hair tousled, the room
masculine, the curtained four-poster huge, this
suite much bigger than Malcolm's. To one
side was the anteroom that adjoined his bedroom, a
dining room off it that could seat twenty with its own
kitchen. Both those doors were bolted. The
dressing table was the only frivolity, she had had
it curtained with pink satin.
  When the tears stopped, she dried her eyes and
silently studied her reflection in the silver
mirror. No lines, some shadows, face a little
thinner than before. No outward change. She sighed
heavily, then began to write again:

  "Crying simply doesn't help. Today I
MUST talk to Malcolm. I simply must.
Andr`e told me the mail ship is already one day
overdue and the news of my catastrophe is bound
to arrive with it--why is it English call
a ship she or her? Her. I'm terrified
Malcolm's mother will be aboard--news of his
injury should have reached Hong Kong on the 24th, which
gives her just enough time to catch this mail ship.
Jamie doubts she would be able to leave at such
short notice, not with her other children there, her
husband dead just three weeks and still being in deepest
mourning, poor woman.
  "When Jamie was here, the first time I've ever
really talked to him alone, he told me all
sorts of stories about the other Struans--Emma
is sixteen, Rose thirteen and Duncan ten--
most of them sad stories: last year two other
brothers the twins, Robb and Dunross, seven,
were drowned in a boating accident just off a place
in Hong Kong called Shek-O where the
Struans have lands and a summer house. And years
ago when Malcolm was seven, another sister,
Mary, then four, died of Happy Valley
fever. Poor little thing, I cried all night
thinking of her and the twins. So young!
  "I like Jamie but he's so dull, so
uncivilized--I mean gauche, that's all--he
has never been to Paris and only knows Scotland
and Struans and Hong Kong. I wonder if I
could insist that if ..." She crossed that out and
changed it to "when we're married ..." Her
pen hesitated. "Malcolm and I will spend a
few weeks in Paris every year--and the children will be
brought up there, of course as Catholic.
  "Andr`e and I were talking about that yesterday, about
being Catholic--he's very kind and takes my mind
off problems as his music always does--and how
Mrs. Struan was Calvinist Protestant, and
what to say if that ever came up. We were talking
softly--oh I am so lucky he is my friend and
forewarned me about father--suddenly he put his fingers
to his lips, went to the door and jerked it open.
That old hag Ah Tok, Malcolm's amah,
had her ear to it and almost fell into the room. Andr`e
speaks some Cantonese and told her off.
  "When I saw Malcolm later in the day he
was abject in his apologies. It's
unimportant I said, the door was unlocked,
my maid was correctly in the room, chaperoning
me, but if Ah Tok wants to spy on me,
please tell her to knock and come in. I confess
I've been distant and cool to Malcolm and he
goes out of his way to be extra pleasant and
calm me, but this is how I feel, though
also I must confess Andr`e advised me to behave
so until our betrothal is public.
  "I had to ask Andr`e, had to I'm afraid,
ask him for a loan--I felt awful. It's the
first time I've ever had to do it but I'm desperate
for some cash. He was kind and agreed to bring me
twenty louis tomorrow on my signature, enough for
incidentals for a week or two--Malcolm just
doesn't seem to notice that I need money and
I didn't want to ask him. ...
  "I really do have an almost permanent headache,
trying to plan a way out of the nightmare. There is
no one I can really trust, even Andr`e, though so
far he has proved his worth. With Malcolm, every
time I start the speech I have rehearsed, I know
the words will sound forced, flat and dreadful before I
begin so I say nothing.
  ""What is it, darling?" he keeps saying.
  ""Nothing," I say, then after I've left
him and relocked my door, I cry and cry
into my pillow. I think I shall go mad with grief
--how could my father lie and cheat and steal my money?
And why can't Malcolm give me a purse without
my having to ask, or offer some so that I can
pretend to refuse and then accept gladly.
Isn't that a husband or fianc`e's duty?
Isn't it a father's duty to protect his beloved
daughter? And why is Malcolm waiting and
waiting to make our betrothal public? Has he
changed his mind? Oh God don't let that
happen. ..."

  Angelique stopped writing, tears beginning
again. One dropped on to the page. Again she wiped
her eyes, sipped some water from a tumbler, then
continued:

  "Today I will talk to him. I must do it today.
One good piece of news is that the British
flagship came back into harbor safely a few
days ago to general rejoicing (we are really quite
defenseless without warships). The ship was battered
and had lost a mast, to be closely followed
by all other vessels, except a 20-gun steam
frigate called Zephyour, with over two
hundred aboard. Perhaps it's safe, I hope
so. The newspaper here says that fifty-three
other seamen and two officers died in the storm, the
typhoon.
  "It was terrible, the worst I have ever
known. I was terrified, by day and by night. I thought
the whole building would be blown away but it is as
solid as Jamie McFay. Much of the native
quarter vanished, and there were many fires. The
frigate Pearl was damaged, also losing a
mast. Yesterday a note came from Captain
Marlowe: I have just heard that you are sick and I
send my deepest and most sincere condolences etc.
  "I don't think I like him, too haughty
though his uniform makes him very glamorous and
accentuates his manhood--which tight breeches are
of course supposed to do, just as we dress to show
our breasts and waists and ankles. Another letter
arrived last evening from Settry Pallidar, the
second, more condolences etc.
  "I think I hate both of them. Every time I
think of them I'm reminded of that hell called
Kanagawa and that they did not do their duty and
protect me. Phillip Tyrer is still in the
Yedo Legation but Jamie said he had heard
Phillip was supposed to be coming back tomorrow or the
day after. That's very good because when he does I have a
plan th--"'


  The dull echoing roar of a cannon made her
jump and pulled her attention to the harbor. It was
the signal gun. Far out to sea another cannon
answered. She looked beyond the fleet to the
horizon and saw the telltale smoke from the
funnel of the arriving mail ship.

  Jamie McFay, a briefcase heavy with
mail under his arm, guided a stranger up main
staircase of the Struan Building, sunlight
flooding through tall and elegant windows of
glass. Both wore woolen frock coats and
top hats though the day was warm. The stranger
carried a small case. He was squat,
bearded, ugly and in his fifties, a head shorter
than Jamie though wider in the shoulders, an
unruly thatch of long grey hair sprouting from
under his hat. They went down the corridor.
McFay knocked gently. "Tai-pan?"
  "Come in, Jamie, door's open." Struan
gaped at the man, then said at once: "Is Mother
aboard, Dr. Hoag?"
  "No, Malcolm." Dr. Ronald Hoag
saw the immediate relief and it saddened him though he
could understand it. Tess Struan had been
vehement in her condemnation of the "foreign
baggage" she was sure had her hooks into her
son. Hiding his concern at Malcolm's loss of
weight and pallor, he put his top hat beside his
bag on the bureau. "She asked me to see you,"
he said, his voice deep and kindly, "to find out
if I could do anything for you and to escort you home
--if you need escorting." For almost fifteen
years he had been the Struan family doctor
in Hong Kong and had delivered the last four of
Malcolm's brothers and sisters. "How are you?"
  "I'm ... Dr. Babcott has been
looking after me. I'm, I'm all right. Thanks
for coming, I'm pleased to see you."
  "I'm pleased to be here too, George
Babcott is a fine doctor, none better."
Hoag smiled, his small topaz eyes set in
a creased and leathery face, and continued
breezily, "Filthy voyage, the tail of the
typhoon caught us and we almost foundered once,
spent my time patching up sailors and the few
passengers--broken limbs mostly. Lost two
overboard, one a Chinese, a steerage
passenger, the other some sort of foreigner, we
never did find out who he was. The Captain said
the man just paid his fare in Hong Kong, mumbled a
name. Spent most of the time in his cabin, then came
on deck once and, poof, a wave caught him.
Malcolm, you look better than I expected
after all the rumors that flooded the Colony."
  Jamie said, "I'd best leave you two
together." He put a pile of letters on the bedside
table. "Here's your personal mail, I'll bring
your books and newspapers later."
  "Thanks." Malcolm watched him. "Anything
important?"
  "Two from your mother. They're on top."
  Dr. Hoag reached into his voluminous
pockets and brought out a crumpled envelope.
"Here's another from her, Malcolm, later than
the others. Best read it then I'll have a look
at you, if I may. Jamie, don't forget about
Babcott."
  Jamie had already told him that Babcott was in
Kanagawa for a clinic this morning and that he would
send the cutter for him the moment they had seen
Malcolm. "See you later, Tai-pan."
  "No, best wait a moment, Jamie."
Struan opened the letter Hoag had given him and
began to read.
  When Jamie had reached the main deck of the
mail ship, Dr. Hoag had met him, told
him that he had all Struan mail ready so they
could leave at once, and in answer to his immediate
question, and relief: "No, Jamie, Mrs.
Struan's not aboard but here, here's a letter from
her."
  It read simply: Jamie, do whatever
Dr. Hoag asks and send me detailed,
confidential reports by every mail.
  "You know what it says, Doc?"'
  "Yes, hardly necessary but then you know the
lady."
  "How is she?"'
  Hoag thought a moment. "As usual:
imperturbable outwardly, inwardly a volcano.
One day it has to explode--no one can keep such
sadness contained, so many tragedies, no one.
Even her." He had followed Jamie down the
gangway, eyes everywhere. "Must say I'm
pleased to have the chance to visit Japan--you're
looking very fit, Jamie. This posting certainly
agrees with you. Let's see, it's almost a year,
isn't it, since your last leave? Now tell me
everything, first about the murderous attack ... then
about Miss Richaud."
  By the time they reached shore, Dr. Hoag knew
all that Jamie knew: "But, please," he
added uneasily, "please don't mention
to Malcolm what I've told you about
Angelique. She's a wonderful person,
she's had a terrible time too, I really don't
think they've bedded, the secret betrothal is
hearsay but he's smitten--not that I blame him,
or anyone in Asia for that matter. I hate the
idea of sending Mrs. Struan secret
reports, for obvious reasons. Anyway,
I've written one, a watered-down version, and
it's ready to go when this ship turns around. My
loyalties must be to Malcolm first and foremost,
he's tai-pan."
  Now watching Malcolm Struan lying there,
reading the letter Hoag had given him, seeing the wan
face and listless body, he began to wonder. And
to pray.
  Struan looked up. His eyes narrowed.
"Yes Jamie?"
  "You wanted me to do something?"
  After a pause Malcolm said, "Yes.
Leave a message at the French
Legation--Angelique's there, she said she was
going to wait for her mail--say an old friend has
arrived from Hong Kong that I'd like her to meet."
  McFay nodded and smiled. "Done. Send for
me when you want anything." He left them.
  Uneasily Struan watched the door.
Jamie's face had been too open. Trying
to regain his calm he went back to the letter:

Malcolm, my poor dear son, Just a short
note in haste as Ronald Hoag leaves at
once for the mail ship I held up so he could
catch it, and you can have the best care. I was aghast
to hear about those swine and that they had attacked you.
Jamie reports that this Dr. Babcott has
had to operate--please write by any express
mail you can and come home quickly so we can care for you
properly. I send my love and prayers, as do
Emma, Rose and Duncan. P.s. I love
you.

  He looked up. "So?"
  "So? Tell me the truth, Malcolm. How
are you?"
  "I feel dreadful and I'm afraid I'm
going to die."
  Hoag sat in the armchair and steepled his
fingers. "The first is understandable, the second not
necessarily accurate though very easy, very very
easy and very very dangerous to believe. Chinese can
"makee die," can think themselves into death even
though healthy--I've seen it happen."
  "Christ, I don't want to die, I have
everything to live for. I want to live and get
well so much I can't tell you. But every night and every
day at some time the thought hits me ... it hits like
a physical blow."
  "What medicine are you taking?"
  "Just some stuff--laudanum's in it--to help
me sleep. The pain's rotten and I'm so
uncomfortable."
  "Every night?"
  "Yes." Struan added, half
apologetically, "He wants me to stop taking
it, says I've ... I should stop."
  "Have you tried?"
  "Yes."
  "But haven't stopped?"
  "No, not yet. My, my will seems to forsake
me."
  "That's one of its problems--however valuable and
beautiful it is." He smiled. "Laudanum was
the name first given by Paracelsus to this panacea.
Do you know Paracelsus?"
  "No."
  "Neither do I," Hoag said with a laugh.
"Anyway we passed the name on to this tincture of
opium. Pity that all derivatives are habit
forming. But then you know that."
  "Yes."
  "We can wean you off it, that's no problem."
  "It's a problem, I know that too, and that you still
don't approve of our opium trade."
  Hoag smiled. "I'm glad you made that a
statement, not a question. But then you don't approve
of it either, no China trader does but you're all
trapped. Now, no economics, no
politics, Malcolm. Next, Miss
Richaud?"
  Struan felt the rush of blood in his face.
"Now you bloody listen once and for all time:
whatever Mother says I'm old enough to know my own
mind and can do what I want! Clear?"
  Hoag smiled benignly. "I'm your
doctor, Malcolm, not your mother. I'm also your
friend. Have I ever failed you, or any one of your
family?"
  With a visible effort Struan shoved away his
anger but could not still his racing heart. "Sorry,
sorry, but I ..." He shrugged helplessly.
"Sorry."
  "That's not necessary. I'm not trying to interfere in
your private life. Your health depends on many
factors. It seems she's a major one.
Hence my question. I ask for medical reasons--not
family reasons. So, Miss Angelique
Richaud?"
  Struan wanted to sound manly and calm but could
not contain his frustration and burst out, "I want
to marry her and it's driving me mad lying here like a
... lying here helpless. For Christ's sake I
can't even get out of bed yet, can't pee or ...
can't do a God-cursed thing, can't hardly drink
or eat or anything without it hurting like hell.
I'm going mad and much as I try I don't
seem to be getting better ..." He continued
ranting until he weakened. Hoag just listened.
Eventually Struan stopped. He mumbled another
apology.
  "May I take a look at you?"
  "Yes ... yes of course."
  With great care Hoag examined him, put his ear
to his chest to listen to his heart, looked in his
mouth, took his pulse, peered at the wound and
smelt it. His fingers probed the stomach walls,
searching for the organs beneath, the extent of the damage:
"Does that hurt ... This ... Is it easier
here?" Every little push caused Malcolm to groan.
At length, Hoag stopped.
  Struan broke the silence. "Well?"
  "Babcott has done a very good job with what
would have by this time killed a normal man."
Hoag's words were measured and full of confidence.
"Now we will try an experiment." Gently he
took Struan's legs and helped him to sit on
the side of the bed. Then, his arm around Malcolm's
shoulders, taking most of the weight with his surprising
strength, he helped him stand. "Careful!"
  Struan could not stay upright by himself, but he had the
impression of standing and this encouraged him. After a
moment or two Hoag settled him in the bed again.
Struan's heart was thumping from the pain but he was
greatly satisfied. "Thanks."
  The doctor sat back in the armchair and
gathered his own strength. Then he said, "I'm going
to leave you now, got to get myself organized. I
would like you to rest. After I've seen Babcott
I'll come back again. We'll probably come
back together. Then we'll talk. All right?"
  "Yes. And ... Thanks, Ronald."
  For an answer Hoag just patted him on the
arm, picked up his belongings and left.
  Once alone, the tears seeped down
Struan's cheeks and these happy tears took him
in sleep. When he awoke, he felt rested,
for the first time refreshed, and he stayed without moving,
glorying in the fact that he had stood up--with
help yes but he had been on his feet and made
a beginning, and that now, now he had a real ally.
  From where he lay, slightly turned on his
left side, he could see out of the window toward the
sea. He loved the sea and hated it, never at
ease on it, fearing it because it was uncontrollable
and unpredictable like on the sunny day when the
twins and the Bosun rowed offshore a hundred
yards or so and a wave came and overturned the
boat and a current took them down, all of them
swimmers, the twins like fish, but all gone
except the seaman. The shock devastated him and
almost killed his father. His mother stayed in one
of her walking comas, saying repeatedly: "the will of
God. We must go on."
  Won't think about my brothers, or Dirk
Struan, he told himself, glad to be safe
ashore. But our past is bound to the sea,
inexorably, and our future. Isn't our
ultimate strength in our clippers and steamers--and
China.
  Japan's a small market, interesting but
small, never to be compared with China. We can make
money here certainly--selective armaments and
ships and British skills will make a bundle.
I'm going to tell Jamie to conclude the Choshu
order. Let them kill themselves and the quicker the
better. Sir William's weak-kneed
dillydallying, waiting for London's approval
to war is stupid. If it was up to me I would
order them to hand over the murderers, to pay up at
once or tomorrow a state of war would exist between us,
and the first act would be to stamp out Yedo. I will never,
never forgive the bastards!
  The horizon beckoned. Soon I must go
back to Hong Kong to take charge. A week or
so. No hurry. Plenty of time.
  What's the time now?
  There was no need to turn and look at the
clock, the angle of the sun told him it was about
noon and he thought that normally he would order
lovely rare roast beef and Yorkshire pudding,
with rich gravy and roast potatoes, a bowl or
two of diced roast chicken with fried rice and
mixed vegetables, and other Chinese dishes that
Ah Tok would make and he enjoyed--however much his
mother and brother and sisters decried as tasteless,
without nourishment, probably poisonous and only
fit for heathens ...
  A slight sound. Angelique was curled up
in the armchair, dwarfed by it, her face tearstained,
and more unhappy than he had ever seen her.
  "Christ, what's the matter?"
  "I'm, I'm ruined." Her tears began again.
  "For God's sake, what're you talking about?"
  "This, it was in today's mail." She got up and
handed him a letter, tried to speak, couldn't. The
sudden movement he made to take it twisted him and
he barely managed to stop crying out.
  The paper was green, like the envelope, dated
Hong Kong, 23rd Sept., the letterhead Guy
Richaud, Richaud Fr@eres, and in French which
Struan could read adequately:

Darling Angelique, In haste. The business
deal I told you about did not turn out very well,
my Portuguese Macao partners cheated me so
I lost heavily. All my present capital
has vanished and you may hear lies spread
by enemies that I am unable to make new banking
arrangements so the company is in the hands of
Receivers. Don't believe them, the future is
bright, never fear, everything is in hand. This letter
goes by tomorrow's mail ship. Today I have passage
on the American steamer, Liberty, for
Bangkok, where I am promised new financing
from French Sources. I will write from there, in
the meantime, I am your devoted Father.
  P.s. By now you will be aware of the sad but
expected news about Culum Struan. We have just
heard about the vile Japper attack on
Malcolm. I hope he's not badly hurt,
please wish him well and give him my hopes
for a quick recovery

  Struan's mind was in a turmoil. "Why are
you ruined?"
  "He's, he took all my money," she
whimpered, "stole all my money and lost that as
well, he's a thief and now, now I've nothing
in the world. He stole all that I have, oh
Malcolm, what am I going to do?"
  "Angelique, Angelique, listen!" She
seemed such a waif, so melodramatic, that he
almost laughed. "For goodness' sake, listen, that's
no problem. I can give you any money you wa--"
  "I can't accept money from you," she cried out
through her tears. "That's not right!"
  "Why not? Soon we'll be married won't
we?"
  The crying stopped. "We ... we will?"
  "Yes. We'll, we'll make the
announcement today."
  "But father, he's," she sniffed tearfully like a
child, "Andr`e told me he was sure that there was no
business deal in Macao or anywhere and never
was. It seems Father was a gambler and must have
gambled it all away. Father had promised, he
had promised Henri, Henri Seratard he would
stop, and pay his bills. ... Everyone knew but
me, oh Malcolm I never knew, I feel so
terrible I could die, Father stole my money, he
swore to keep my money safe!"
Another burst of crying and she ran over to him and
was on her knees beside the bed, her head buried
into the counterpane. Tenderly he stroked her
hair, feeling very strong and in command. The door
opened and Ah Tok strode in.
  "Get out," he bellowed. "Dew neh loh
moh!" She fled.
  Genuinely frightened, Angelique cowered
deeper into the covering. She had never known his
anger. He caressed her hair. "Don't
worry, my darling, don't worry about your father,
I'll see what we can do to help him later, but
now you mustn't worry, I'm looking after you," his
words ever more tender. Her sobbing lessened, the vast
weight off her now that she had told him the truth
and given him the news before he heard it from others--
and that he did not seem to care.
  Andr`e's a genius, she was thinking, exhausted
with relief. He swore that this would be
Malcolm's reaction: "Just be honest,
Angelique, tell Malcolm the truth, that you
didn't know your father was a gambler, that this is the first
you've heard about it and you're shocked beyond words, that
your father has stolen your money--important you
use the words stolen and thief--tell the truth, show
him his letter andwiththe right amount of tears and tenderness this
will bond him to you forever."
  "But Andr`e," she had said miserably,
"I daren't show him Father's letter. I daren't, his
postscript sounds so awful ..."
  "Look! Without the second page the
postscript just says, my hopes for a quick
recovery. Perfect! The second page?
What second page? There, it's torn up and
never existed."

  Andr`e's nimble fingers glued the last shred of the
reassembled second page into place. "There,
Henri," he said and pushed it across the desk.
"Read for yourself." It had taken him no time at
all to rebuild the page from the pieces he had
seemingly thrown carelessly into his wastepaper
basket.
  They were in Seratard's office, the door
locked. The page read:

... and hopes, as we discussed, you can position
an early betrothal and marriage by whatever means
necessary ... He is the catch of the season and
vital for our future, yours
particularly. Struan will permanently solve
Richaud Fr@eres. Never mind that he is
British, too young or whatever, now he's
tai-pan of Struan's and can assure us of a
smooth future. Be adult, Angelique, do
anything necessary to bond him to you because your future
is presently threadbare.

  "That's not so terrible," Seratard said
uneasily, "just a father's panic advice, reaching
for straws. Struan is without doubt a wonderful
catch for any girl and Angelique ... who could
blame a father?"
  "That depends on the father. This, if used at the
correct time in the correct way is another
weapon over her, therefore over the Noble House."
  "Then you think the poor girl will be
successful?"
  "We must work to make it so. Now that we've this
evidence to use, if necessary, we must assist her as
a matter of policy." Andr`e's lips were a thin
cold line. "Not that I think she's a poor
girl. She's the one who's prepared to snare him
by any means necessary. Eh?"
  Seratard sat back in the red leather chair.
His office bureau was tatty except for a few
oils of modern, little-known French painters,
Manet amongst them, that he collected cheaply
through a Paris agent from time to time. "What's she
doing but reacting to a young man's love?" He
shoved the paper back. "I don't like these
methods, Andr`e. They're distasteful. You
encouraged the girl into the morass of half-truths
by telling her to give him half the letter."
  "Machiavelli wrote, "It is necessary for the
State to deal in lies and half truths, because people
are made up of lies and half truths. Even
princes." And certainly, by definition, all
Ambassadors and politicians." Andr`e
shrugged. Carefully he folded the letter. "Perhaps
we won't have to use it, but it's good to have it because we
represent the State."
  "Use it, how?"
  "The fact that she tore it up and ..."
  "She didn't," Seratard said, shocked.
  "Of course," Andr`e said coldly. "But it's
her word against mine and who wins that contest? The fact
that she tore up the second page and only showed
Struan the first should be enough to damn her in his eyes.
This gives him a perfect excuse
to annul any promise of marriage "as he had
been deceived." His mother? If she knew about this she
would concede us all sorts of concessions to gain
possession of it, if he insists on marrying her,
against her advice."
  "I don't like blackmail."
  Andr`e flushed. "I don't like lots of
methods I'm obliged to use for our, I repeat
our purposes." He put the page with the fine
writing into his pocket. "Circulated in
society or published, with the details, this
document would destroy Angelique. In a court
it would damn her. Perhaps it only shows the truth:
that she is just an adventuress, in conspiracy with
her father who is, who is at best a gambler and
soon to be bankrupt, like her uncle. As
to encouraging her, I only tell her what she
wants to know and say. To help her. It's her
mess, not mine or ours."
  Seratard sighed. "Sad. Sad that she is
embroiled."
  "Yes, but she is, isn't she, to our
advantage?" Andr`e's lips smiled but not his
eyes. "And yours personally, Monsieur?
Judiciously used this would guarantee her into your
bed, would it not, if your undoubted charm failed, which
I doubt."
  Seratard did not smile. "And you Andr`e?
What are we going to do about Hana, the Flower?"
  Andr`e looked at him abruptly. "The
Flower is dead."
  "Yes. And under such strange circumstances."
  "Not strange," Andr`e said, his eyes suddenly
flat as a reptile's. "She committed
suicide."
  "She was found with her throat cut, with your
knife. The mama-san says you spent the night
with her as usual."
  Andr`e was trying to work out why Seratard was
probing now. "I did but this is none of your
business."
  "I'm afraid it is. The local Bakufu
official sent a formal request for information
yesterday."
  "Tell him to kill himself. Hana, the Flower
was special, yes, she was mine, yes. I paid the
very top pillow price for her, but she was still only
part of the Willow World."
  "As you said so rightly, people are made up of lies
and half-truths. The complaint reports
that you had a violent row with her. Because she had
taken a lover."
  "We had a row yes and I wanted to kill her
yes, but not for that reason," Andr`e muttered,
choked. "The truth is ... the truth is she did
have some clients. Three--in the other House but this
was this was before she became my property. One of them
... one of them gave her the pox, she gave it
to me."
  Seratard was aghast. "Mon Dieu,
syphilis?"
  "Yes."
  "Mon Dieu, you're sure?"
  "Yes." Andr`e got up and went to the
sideboard and poured some brandy and drank it.
"Babcott confirmed it a month ago. No
mistake. It could only have been her. When I
asked her about it, she ...."
  He was seeing her again, looking up at him in the
little house within the walls of the House of the Three
Carp, a little frown on the perfect oval of her
face. She was just seventeen and five feet
tall.
  "Hai, gomen nasai,
Furansu-san, spot, like yours, but year 'g,
mine sukoshi, rittle, hai, rittle,
Furansu-san, sukoshi, no bad, go
'way," she said gently with her sweet smile in
her usual mixture of Japanese and bits of
English, her l's always like r's. "Hana
tell mama-san. Mama-san say see
doctor, he say no bad. No bad spot but
because just begin pillow and I small. Doctor say
pray at shrine and drink medicine, ugh! But few
week all gon'way." She added happily.
"All gon'way year ago."
  "It hasn't "gone away"!"
  "Why anger? No worry. I pray at
Shinto shrine like doctor say, pay priest many
taels, I eat ..." Her face crinkled with
her laugh, "eat nasty medicine. Few week
all gone."
  "It hasn't gone. It won't. There's no
cure!"
  She had looked at him strangely. "All
gon', you see me, my body, all, how many
time, neh? Of course all gon'way."
  "For Christ sake it hasn't!"
  Another frown, then she shrugged. "Karma,
neh?"'
  He had exploded. Her shock was vast and she
put her head to the tatami and pitifully began
to beg his pardon, "No bad, Furansu-san,
gon'way, doctor say, gon'way. You see
same doctor soon, all go'way. ..."
  Outside their shoji walls he could hear
footsteps and whispers. "You have to see the
English doctor!" His heart was thundering in his
ears and he was trying to speak coherently, knowing that
going to a doctor, any doctor, was useless and that
though sometimes the ravages could be arrested, perhaps, as
sure as the sun would dawn tomorrow, the ravages would
one day arrive in force. "Don't you understand?"'
he had shrieked. "There's no cure!"
  She just stayed bowed, shaking like a brutalized
puppy, saying monotonously, "No bad,
Furansu-san, no bad, all go'way ..."
  He dragged himself back and looked again at
Seratard. "When I questioned her about it she said she
had been cured, a year ago. She believed it,
of course she believed it and she was cured. Me,
oh yes I was screaming and asked her why she
hadn't told Raiko-san and she mumbled something
about, What was there to tell, the doctor said it was
nothing and her mama-san would have told
Raiko-san if it had been important."
  "But this is terrible, Andr`e. Did Babcott
see her?"
  "No." Another swallow of brandy but he
felt none of its customary bite, then said in a
rush, desperate to tell someone at last,
"Babcott told me the pox ... he told me
an early poxed woman can appear to be without
blemish in every way, that she won't always pass it
on, not every time you bed, God knows why, but it's
inevitable she will sometime if you continue with her and
once a sore appears you're lost though after a
month or so the sore or sores go away and you
think you're safe but you're not!" Now the vein in the
center of Andr`e's forehead was knotted and black
and pulsating. "Weeks or months later there's
a rash, this's the second stage. It's strong
or weak depending on only God knows what and
sometimes brings hepatitis or meningitis and
stays or goes away, the rash, depending on
Christ knows what. The last stage, the horror
stage, appears anytime, anytime, months up
to, up to thirty years later."
  Seratard took out a handkerchief and wiped his
brow, praying that he would be spared, thinking
about the frequent times he visited the Yoshiwara,
about his own musume that now he kept for himself
alone but could never guarantee had no other lover.
How can you prove or disprove that if there's
collusion with the mama-san when they're only
interested in fleecing you? "You had the right to kill
her," he said grimly. "And the mama-san."
  "Raiko wasn't responsible. I'd told
her none of the girls here, anywhere in the
Yoshiwara, were ones I wanted. I wanted
someone young, special, a virgin or almost one.
I begged her to find me a flower, explaining
exactly what I wanted, and she did and
Hana-chan was everything I wanted, perfection--
she came from one of the best Houses in Yedo. You
can't imagine how beautiful she is, was ..."
  He remembered how his heart had leapt the first
time Raiko had shown her to him, chattering with other
girls in another room. "That one, Raiko, in
the pale blue kimono."
  "I advise stay with Fujiko or Akiko
or one of my other ladies," Raiko had said,
when she wanted, her English good. "In time I
will find you another. There little Saiko. In a year
or two ..."
  "That one, Raiko. She perfect. Who is
she?"'
  "Her name is Hana, the Flower. Her
mama-san say the pretty little thing was born near
Ky@oto, bought by her House when three or four
for training as geisha." Raiko smiled.
"Luckily, she's not geisha--if geisha, she
would be not on offer, so sorry."
  "Because I gai-jin?"'
  "Because geisha is for entertainment, not pillowing,
and, Furansu-san, so sorry, truly
difficult to appreciate if not Japanese.
Hana's teachers were patient, but she could not
develop the skills so she was trained for the
pillow."
  "I want her, Raiko."
  "A year ago she was old enough to begin. Her
mama-san arranged the best pillow prices, of
course only after Hana had approved the
client. Three clients only have enjoyed her,
her mama-san says she is fine pupil, and
only allowed to pillow twice weekly. Only
mark against her, she was born in the Year of the
Fire Horse."
  "What that mean?"'
  "You know we count time in cycles of twelve
years, like the Chinese, each year with an animal
name, Dragon, Snake, Cockerel, Bull,
Horse and so on. But each also has one of the
five elements: fire, water, earth, iron,
wood that vary, cycle by cycle. Ladies born
in Year of Horse, with the fire sign, are thought
to be ... unlucky."
  "Not believe superstitions. Please say
price."
  "She is a pillow Flower beyond price."
  "The price, Raiko."
  "To the other House, ten koku,
Furansu-san. To this House, two koku a
year, and price of her house of own within my fence,
two maids, all the clothes she wants, and parting
gift of five koku when you no longer require
her services--this sum to be deposited with our
Gyokoyama rice merchant-banker, at interest
which, until time of parting, is yours--all to be in
writing, signed and registered with Bakufu."
  The sum was huge by Japanese standards,
extravagant by European counting even with the rate
of exchange heavily weighed in the European's
favor. For a week he had bartered and had
managed to reduce the price only a few sous.
Every night his dreams drove him onwards. So he
had agreed. With due ritual seven months ago
she had been presented to him formally. She agreed
to accept him formally. They both signed formally. The
next night he had pillowed and she was everything he
had dreamed. Laughing, happy, enthusiastic,
tender, loving. "She was a gift of God,
Henri."
  "Of the devil. The mama-san too."
  "No, it wasn't her fault. The day before I
received Hana, Raiko told me, formally--it was
also on the deed of payment--that the past was the past,
she promised only to cherish Hana as one of her
own girls, to make sure Hana was never seen
by other men and remained mine alone, from that day
onwards."
  "Then she killed her?"
  Andr`e poured another drink. "I ... I
asked Hana to name the three men, one of them is
my murderer, but she said she couldn't--or wouldn't.
I, I smashed her around the face to force it out of
her and she just whimpered and didn't cry out. I would
have killed her, yes, but I loved her and ... then
I left. I was like a mad dog, it was
three or four o'clock by then and I just walked into the
sea. Maybe I wanted to drown myself, I
don't know, don't remember exactly, but the
cold water gave me back my head. When I
got back to the House, Raiko and the others were in
shock, incoherent. Hana was crumpled where I
left her. Now in a mess of blood, my
knife in her throat."
  "Then she committed suicide?"
  "That's what Raiko said."
  "You don't believe it?"
  "I don't know what to believe," Andr`e said
in anguish. "I only know I went back
to tell her I loved her, that the pox was karma, not
her fault, not her fault, that I was sorry I
said what I said and did what I did, that everything
would be as before except, except when it became,
became obvious we would suicide together ..."
  Henri was trying to think, his own brain addled.
He had never even heard of the House of the Three
Carp before rumors of the girl's death had rushed
through the Settlement. Andr`e's always been so
secretive, he thought, correctly so, and he's
right, it was none of my business--until the
Bakufu made it official. "The three men,
did this Raiko know who they were?"
  Numbed, Andr`e shook his head. "No, and the
other mama-san would not tell her."
  "Who is she? What's her name? Where is she?
We'll report her to the Bakufu, they could force
it out of her."
  "They wouldn't care, why should they? The other
House--it was a meeting place for
revolutionaries, Inn of the Forty-seven Ronin,
a week or so ago it was burned to the ground and her
head stuck on a spike. Holy Mother of God,
Henri, what am I going to do? Hana's dead and
I'm alive ..."

                 

  Early that afternoon Dr. Hoag was in the cutter
heading for the Legation wharf at Kanagawa.
Babcott had sent word that he could not leave
Kanagawa as he was operating in his clinic there but
would return as soon as possible: ...
sorry, it can't be until late tonight,
probably not until tomorrow morning. You're more than
welcome to join me here if you wish but be prepared
to stay the night as the weather is
changeable ...
  Waiting on the wharf was a Grenadier and Lim
who wore a white coat, loose black
trousers, slippers and small skullcap. As
Hoag came ashore Lim yawned a token bow.
"Heya Mass'er, Lim-ah, Numb'r One
Boy."
  "We can stop pidgin coolie talk, Lim,"
Hoag said in passable Cantonese, and Lim's
eyes crossed. "I am Medicine Doctor
Wise Enlightened." This was Hoag's Chinese
name--the meaning of the two characters nearest to the
Cantonese sound of "hoh" and "geh"--
selected out of dozens of possibilities for him
by Gordon Chen, the Struan compradore, one of
his patients.
  Lim stared at him, pretending not to understand, the
usual and quickest way to make a foreign devil
lose face who had the impertinence to dare to learn
a few words of the civilized tongue. Ayeeyah,
he thought, who's this gamy fornicator, this putrid
red devil mother-eater with the neck of a bull, this
toadlike monkey who has the gall to speak in
our tongue with such a foul superior manner ...
  "Ayeeyah," Hoag said sweetly, "also I
have many, very many dirty word to describe a
fornicator's mother and her putrefying parts if a
man from a dog-piss, dung-heap village
gives me an eyelid of cause--like pretending
not to understand me."
  "Medicine Doctor Wise Enlightened?
Ayeeyah, that's a good name!" Lim guffawed.
"And never have I heard such good man-talk from a
foreign devil in many a year."
  "Good. You will soon hear more if I am called
again foreign devil. Noble House Chen selected
my name."
  "Noble House Chen?" Lim gawked at him.
"Illustrious Chen who has more bags of gold
than an oxen has hairs? Ayeeyah, what a
fornicating privilege!"
  "Yes," Hoag agreed, adding not quite the truth,
"and he told me if I have any dung-mixed
troubles from any person of the Middle Kingdom--be
he high or low--or not the at-once-service a
friend of his must expect, to mention the vile
fornicator's name on my return."
  "Oh ko, Medicine Doctor Wise
Enlightened, it is indeed an honor to have you in our
humble dung-heap house."
  Dr. Hoag felt he had achieved greatness,
blessing his teachers, mostly grateful patients,
who had taught him the really important words and
how to deal with certain persons and situations in the
Middle Kingdom. The day was pleasant and warm
and the look of the small town pleased him, the
temples he could see over the rooftops,
fishermen trawling the inland waters, peasants
everywhere in the paddy, people coming and going and the inevitable
stream of travellers on the Tokaid@o beyond.
By the time they reached the Legation with Lim's
overtly attentive support, Hoag had a
fairly good picture of what the situation was in
Kanagawa, today's number of Babcott's
patients, and what to expect.
  George Babcott was in his surgery,
assisted in the operation by a Japanese acolyte,
a trainee appointed by the Bakufu to learn
Western medicine, the anteroom outside crowded
with villagers, men and women and children. The operation was
messy, a foot amputation: "Poor fellow's
a fisherman, got his leg trapped between the boat
and the wharf, should never have happened, too much sak`e
I'm afraid. When I'm through we can discuss
Malcolm. Did you see him?"
  "Yes, no hurry. It's good to see you,
George, can I help in any way?"
  "Thanks, I'd appreciate that. I'm all
right here but if you could sift through the mob outside?
Those who are urgent, those who can wait. Treat
any you want. There's another "surgery"
next door though it's little more than a sickroom.
Mura, give me the saw," he said in studied
English to his assistant and accepted the tool and
began to use it. "Whenever I have a surgery here it
gets hectic. In the cabinet there are the usual
placebos, iodine, etc., usual medicines,
painkillers, bitter cough mixtures for the sweet
old ladies and sweet ones for the angry."
  Hoag left him and looked over the waiting men
women and children, astonished with their orderliness,
patience, the bows and lack of noise. Quickly he
established none had smallpox, leprosy,
measles, typhoid or cholera or any of the other
infectious diseases or plagues that were endemic in
most of Asia. More than a little relieved he
began to question them individually and met with grave
suspicion. Fortunately, one was an elderly
itinerant Cantonese letter writer and
soothsayer, Cheng-sin, who could also
speak some Japanese. With his help--after being
introduced as the Giant Healer's Teacher--and a
promise of an especially good, new modern
medicine to ease his hacking cough, Dr. Hoag
began a second surgery.
  Some had minor ailments. A few were serious.
Fevers, illnesses, dysentery and the like, some he
could diagnose, some he could not. Broken limbs,
sword and knife cuts, ulcers. One, a young
woman, in great pain, heavily pregnant.
  His practiced eye told him the birth, her
fourth, would be bad and that most of her trouble was
caused by marrying too young, working the fields too
long and carrying too much. He gave her a
small bottle of opium extract. "Tell
her when her time is come and the pain is bad to drink
a spoonful."
  "Spoonful? How big, Honorable Wise
Enlightened?"
  "A normal-size spoon, Cheng-sin."
  The woman bowed. "Domo arigato
gozaimashita," she muttered as she left,
pathetic in her thanks, both hands trying to carry
the weight of her belly.
  Children with fevers and colds and hookworm,
sores but not nearly as bad as he had expected,
no mal-aria. Teeth generally good and strong,
eyes clear, no lice--all patients
astonishingly clean and healthy compared with similar
villagers in China. No opium addicts. After
an hour he was happily in his stride. He had
just finished setting a broken arm when the door
opened and a well-dressed, attractive young
girl came in hesitantly and bowed. Her
kimono was blue patterned silk, the obi
green, hair dressed with combs. Blue
sunshade.
  Hoag noticed Cheng-sin's eyes narrow.
She answered his questions and spoke even more
persuasively though clearly quite nervous, her
voice soft.
  "Medicine Doctor Wise Enlightened,"
Cheng-sin said, his speech punctuated with the
permanent, dry cough that Hoag had diagnosed
instantly as terminal consumption. "This Lady
say her brother need important help, near
death. She beg you to accompany her--house is
nearby."
  "Tell her to have him brought here."
  "Unfortunately afraid to move
him."
  "What's the matter with him?"
  After more questions and answers, which to Hoag sounded more
like bargaining than anything else, Cheng-sin said,
"Her house only one or two street outside.
Her brother is ..." he coughed as he searched
for the word, "sleep like dead man, but alive with mad
talk and fever." His voice became more honeyed.
"She afraid move him, Honorable Medicine
Doctor Wise Enlightened. Her brother
samurai, she say many important persons very
happy if you help brother. I think she say
truth."
  From Hong Kong newspapers Hoag was
acquainted with the importance of samurai as the
absolute ruling class in Japan, and that
anything that would gain their confidence, and thus their
cooperation, would assist British influence. He
studied her. At once she dropped her eyes.
Her nervousness increased. She appeared to be
fifteen or sixteen and her features quite unlike
the villagers, lovely skin. If her brother's
samurai so is she, he thought, intrigued.
"What's her name?"
  "Uki Ichikawa. Please to hurry."
  "Her brother's an important samurai?"
  "Yes," Cheng-sin said. "I accompany you,
not be fear."
  Hoag snorted. "Afraid? Me? The pox
on fear! Wait here." He went to the surgery,
opened the door quietly. Babcott was heavily
involved extracting an abscessed tooth, his
knee on the youth's chest, the distraught mother wringing
her hands and chattering. He decided not to disturb
him.
  At the gates the Sergeant of the Guard
politely stopped them and asked where he was going.
"I'll send a couple of my lads with you.
Better safe than sorry."
  The girl tried to dissuade them from bringing
soldiers but the Sergeant was adamant. At
length she agreed and, more nervously, led the way
down one street, into an alley, into another and then
another. The villagers they passed averted their
eyes and scuttled away. Hoag carried his
doctor's bag. Over the rooftops he could still
see the temple, and was reassured, and glad for the
soldiers, knowing it would have been foolhardy to go
without them. Cheng-sin plodded along, a tall
staff in his hand.
  This young lady's not all she pretends to be,
Hoag thought, not a little excited by the adventure.
  Into another alley. Then she stopped at a
door set in a tall fence and knocked. A
grill opened, then the door. When the burly
servant saw the soldiers he started to close it
but the girl imperiously ordered him to desist.
  The garden was small, well kept but not
extravagant. At the steps to the veranda of a
small shoji house, she slipped out of clog
shoes and asked them to do the same. It was awkward
for Hoag as he wore high boots. At once
she ordered the servant to help him and was obeyed
instantly.
  "You two best guard here," Hoag said to the
soldiers, embarrassed by the holes in his socks.
  "Yes sir." One of the soldiers checked his
rifle. "I'll just look around the back. Any
trouble just shout."
  The girl slid back the shoji. Ori
Ryoma, the shishi of the Tokaid@o attack,
lay on the futons, the sheet soaking, a
maidservant fanning him. Her eyes widened
seeing Hoag and not Honorable Medicine Giant
Healer as she had expected and she backed away
as he came in ponderously.
  Ori was unconscious, in a coma--his
swords on a low rack nearby, a flower
arrangement in the takoma. Hoag squatted on
his haunches beside him. The youth's forehead was very
hot, face flushed, dangerously high fever.
The cause was quickly apparent as Hoag pulled
away the bandage on his shoulder and upper arm.
"Christ," he muttered, seeing the extent of the
puffy, poisonous inflammation, the telltale
smell and black of dead tissue--gangrene--
around the bullet wound.
  "When was he shot?"
  "She not know exactly. Two or three
weeks."
  Once more he looked at the wound. Then,
oblivious of all the eyes focused on him, he
went out and sat on the edge of the veranda and stared
into space.
  All I need now is my fine Hong Kong
hospital and fine operation equipment, my
wonderful Nightingale nurses, together with a
barrel of luck, to save this poor youth. Fucking
guns, fucking wars, fucking politicians ...
  For God's sake, I've been
trying to patch up gun mutilations all my working
life, failing most of the time--six years with the
East India Company in bloody Bengal,
fifteen years in the Colony and Opium War
years, a volunteered year in the Crimea, the
bloodiest of all, with the Hong Kong Hospital
Detachment. Fucking guns! Christ, what a
waste!
  After he had sworn his rage away he lit a
cheroot, puffed, then discarded the match. At once
the shocked servant rushed forward and picked up the
offending object.
  "Oh sorry," Hoag said, not having noticed
the pristine cleanliness of the path and surrounds.
He inhaled deeply, then dismissed everything from his
mind except the youth. At length he decided,
began to throw his butt away, stopped and gave it
to the servant who bowed and went to bury it.
  "Cheng-sin, tell her I'm sorry but if I
operate or not I think her brother will die.
Sorry."
  "She says "If die is karma. If no
help, he dies today, tomorrow. Please to try. If
he dies, karma. She ask help.""
Cheng-sin added softly: "Medicine Doctor
Wise Enlightened, this youth important.
Important try, heya?"
  Hoag looked at the girl. Her eyes gazed
back at him.
  "Dozo, Hoh Geh-sama," she said.
Please.
  "Very well, Uki. Cheng-sin, tell her again
I can't promise anything but I'll try. I will
need soap, lots of hot water in bowls, lots
of clean sheets, lots of sheets torn
into swabs and bandages, lots of quiet and someone
with a strong stomach to help me."
  At once the girl pointed at herself.
"S@oji shimasu." I will do it.
  Hoag frowned. "Tell her it will be very
unpleasant, much blood, much stink, and ugly."
He saw her listen intently to the Chinese, then
reply with evident pride, "Gomen nasai,
Hoh Geh-san, wakarimasen. Watashi
samurai desu."
  "She say, "Please to excuse, I understand.
I am samurai.""
  "I don't know what that means to you, pretty
young lady, and I didn't know women could be
samurai, but let's begin."
  Hoag found out quickly that one characteristic of
samurai was courage. Never once did she
falter during the cleaning operation, cutting away the
infected tissue, releasing the foul-smelling
pus, flushing the wound, blood pulsing from a
partially severed vein until he could stanch the flow
and repair it, swabbing and swabbing again--the big
sleeves of the maid's kimono into which she had
changed rolled up and fastened out of the way, and the
scarf with which she had tied back her hair, both
soon soiled and reeking.
  For an hour he worked away, humming from time
to time, ears closed, nostrils closed, every sense
engrossed, repeating an operation he had done a
thousand times too often. Cutting, sewing, cleaning,
bandaging. Then he had finished.
  Without haste he stretched to ease his cramped
back muscles, washed his hands and took off the
now bloody sheet he had used as an apron.
Ori was balanced on the edge of the veranda as a
makeshift table, he standing in the garden against it:
"Can't operate on my knees easily,
Uki," he had said.
  Everything he had wanted done she had done without
hesitation. There had been no need to anesthetize
the man he was told was Hiro Ichikawa, his coma
was so deep. Once or twice Ori cried out,
but not from pain, just some devil in his nightmare. And
struggled, but without strength.
  Ori sighed deeply. Anxiously Hoag
felt his pulse. It was imperceptible, so was the
breathing. "Never mind," he muttered. "At least
he has a pulse."
  "Gomen nasai, Hoh Geh-san," the
soft voice said, "anata kangaemasu,
hai, iy`e?"
  "She says, "Excuse me, Honorable
Wise Enlightened you think yes or no?"'"
Cheng-sin coughed. He had spent the time well
away from the veranda, his back towards them.
  Hoag shrugged, watching her, wondering about her,
where the strength came from, where she lived and what would
happen now. She was quite pale, her features stark
but still dominated by an iron will. His eyes crinkled
with a smile. "I don't know. It's up to God.
Uki, you number one. Samurai."
  "Domo ... domo arigato
gozaimashita." Thank you. She bowed to the
tatami. Her real name was Sumomo Anato,
she was Hiraga's wife-to-be, and
Shorin's sister, not Ori's.
  "She asks what should she do now?"
  "For her brother, nothing at moment. Tell the
maid to put cold towels on his forehead and keep
bandages soaked with clean water until the fever
goes down. If the ... once the fever's gone
--I hope before dawn--the youth will live.
Perhaps." And what are the odds, was usually the next
question. This time it did not happen. "Well, I'll
go now. Tell her to send guide for me early tomorrow
morning ..." if he's still alive, was in his mind
but he decided not to say it.
  As Cheng-sin translated he began to wash his
instruments. The girl beckoned the manservant and
spoke to him. "Hai," the man said and hurried
away.
  "Medicine Doctor Wise Enlightened, before
you go Lady say sure to want bath. Yes?"
  Dr. Hoag was on the point of saying no, but
found himself nodding yes. And he was glad that he
did.

  In the gloaming Babcott sat on the Legation
veranda enjoying a whisky, exhausted but pleased with
his surgery. There was a good smell of the sea on the
breeze that touched the garden. As his eyes strayed
involuntarily to the shrubbery where the black-clothed
assassin had been caught and killed three
weeks ago, the temple bell began tolling and the
distant deep-throated chant of the monks sounded:,
"Ommm mahnee padmee hummmmm ..."
He looked up as Hoag plodded up towards
him. "Good God!"
  Hoag wore a patterned, belted yukata,
white shoe-socks on his feet and Japanese
clogs. Hair and beard combed and freshly washed.
Under his arm was a large straw-covered cask of
sak`e and he was beaming. "Evening, George!"
  "You look pleased with yourself, where have you been?"
  "The best part was the bath." Hoag put the
cask onto a sideboard, poured a stiff
whisky. "My God, the best I've ever had.
Can't believe how good I feel now."
  "How was she?" Babcott asked dryly.
  "No sex, old man, just scrubbed clean and
dunked in damn near boiling water, pummelled
and massaged and then into this garb. Meanwhile all
my clothes were washed and ironed, boots cleaned and
socks replaced. Marvelous. She gave me the
sak`e and these ..." He fished into his
sleeve and showed Babcott two oval-shaped
coins and a scroll covered with characters.
  "My God, you've been well paid, these are
gold oban--they'll keep you in champagne for
at least a week! The Sergeant told me you were
on a house call." They both laughed. "Was
he a daimyo?"
  "Don't think so, he was a youth, a
samurai. Don't think I helped him much. Can
you read the scroll?"
  "No, but Lim can. Lim!"
  "Yes Mass'r?"
  "Paper what?"
  Lim took the scroll. His eyes widened and
then he re-read it carefully, and said to Hoag in
Cantonese: "It says, "Medicine
Doctor Wise Enlightened has performed a great
service. In the name of Satsuma shishi, give
him all help he needs."" Lim pointed at
the signature, his finger trembling. "Sorry,
Lord, the name I can't read."
  "Why are you frightened?" Hoag asked, also in
Cantonese.
  Uneasily Lim said, "Shishi are rebels,
bandits hunted by the Bakufu. There're bad people
even though samurai, Lord."
  Impatiently Babcott asked, "What's it
say, Ronald?"
  Hoag told him.
  "Good God, a bandit? What happened?"
  Thirstily Hoag poured another drink and
began describing in detail the woman, the youth
and wound and how he had cut away the dead
tissue. "... seems the poor bugger got shot
two or three weeks ago an--"
  "Christ Almighty!" Babcott leapt to his
feet as everything fell into place, startling Hoag
who spilt his drink.
  "Are you bonkers?" Hoag spluttered.
  "Can you find your way back there?"
  "Eh? Well, well yes I suppose so but
what--"
  "Come on, hurry." Babcott rushed out
shouting, "Sergeant of the Guard!"

  They were loping down a back alley, Hoag
leading, still in his yukata, but now wearing his boots,
Babcott close behind, the Sergeant and ten
soldiers following, all of them armed. The few
pedestrians, some with lanterns,
scattered out of the way. Above was a fair moon.
  Hurrying faster now. A missed turning.
Hoag cursed, then doubled back, got his bearings
and found the half-hidden mouth to the correct
alley. On again. Another alley. He
stopped, pointed. Twenty yards ahead was the
door.
  At once the Sergeant and soldiers charged
passed him. Two put their backs to the wall on
guard, four slammed their shoulders into the door,
bursting it off its hinges and they poured through the gap,
Hoag and Babcott after them--both carrying
borrowed rifles easily, expert in their use,
a common skill and a necessity for European
civilians in Asia.
  Along the pathway. Up the steps. The
Sergeant hauled the shoji open. The room was
empty. Without hesitation he led the way into the
next room and the next. No sign of anyone in
any of the five interconnecting rooms or kitchen
or little wooden outhouse. Out again into the garden.
  "Spread out, lads, Jones and Berk go that
way, you two over there, you two that way and you two
guard here and for Chrissake keep your 'kin eyes
open." They went deeper into the garden in pairs,
one guarding the other, the lesson of the first assassin
well learned. Into every nook. Around all the
perimeter, safety catches off.
  Nothing. When the Sergeant came back he was
sweating. "Sweet fanny adams, sir! Not a
bloody whisper, nothing. You sure this is the right
place, sir?"
  Hoag pointed to a dark patch on the veranda.
"That's where I operated."
  Babcott cursed and looked around. This house
was surrounded by others but only roofs showed above the
fence and no windows overlooked this way. Nowhere
else to hide. "They must have left the moment you
did."
  Hoag wiped the sweat off his brow, secretly
glad that she had slipped away and was not trapped.
After he had left for the bath he had,
regretfully, not seen her again. The maid had
given him the money and scroll, both neatly
wrapped, and the cask and told him her mistress
would send a guide for him tomorrow morning and thanked
him.
  About her brother, now, he was ambivalent. The
youth was just a patient, he was a doctor and
wanted his work to succeed. "Never occurred
to me the youth might have been one of the assassins.
It wouldn't have made any difference, not to the
operation. At least now we know his name."
  "A thousand oban to a bent button it was
false, we don't even know if the youth was her
brother. If he was shishi as the scroll said,
it's bound to be false and anyway, being devious
is an old Japanese custom." Babcott
sighed. "I can't be certain either it was the
Tokaid@o devil. Just a hunch. What are his
chances?"
  "The move wouldn't have helped." Hoag thought a
moment, so squat and froglike against the immense
height of Babcott, neither of them conscious of the
difference. "I checked him just before I left. His
pulse was weak but steady, I think I got most
of the dead tissue away but ..." He shrugged.
"You know how it is: "You pays your money and you
takes your chances." I wouldn't bet much money
he'll live. But then, who knows, eh? Now, now
tell me about the attack, the details."
  On the way back Babcott related all that
had happened. And about Malcolm Struan. "He
worries me, but Angelique's just about the best
nurse he could have."
  "Jamie said the same. I agree there's
nothing like a beautiful young lady in a sickroom.
Malcolm's lost a devilish lot of weight--
and spirit--but he's young and he's always been the strong
one in the family, after his mother. He should be all
right so long as the stitches hold. I've every
confidence in your work, George, though it'll be a
long haul for him, poor lad. He's very taken
with the girl, isn't he?"
  "Yes. And reciprocated. Lucky
fellow."
  They walked in silence a moment. Hoag said
hesitantly, "I, well I presume you know
his mother is completely opposed to any form of
liaison with the young lady."
  "Yes, I've heard that. That creates a
problem."
  "Then you think Malcolm's serious?"
  "Head-over-heels serious. She's quite a
girl."
  "You know her?"
  "Angelique? Not really, not as a patient,
not really, though, as said, I've seen her under
terrible stress. You?"
  Hoag shook his head. "Just at
parties, the races, socially. Since she arrived
three or four months ago she's been the toast
of every ball and rightly. Never as a patient, there's
a French doctor in Hong Kong now--imagine
that! But I agree she's stunning. Not
necessarily an ideal wife for Malcolm, if
that's his bent."
  "Because she's not English? And not wealthy?"
  "Both of those and more. Sorry but I just can't
trust the French, bad stock--it's in their
makeup. Her father's a perfect example,
charming, gallant on the surface and scallywag just
below and through and through. Sorry but I wouldn't select
his daughter for my son when he's of age."
  Babcott wondered if Hoag knew that he was
aware of the scandal: while young doctor Hoag was
with the East India Company twenty-five odd
years ago in Bengal, he had married an
Indian girl, against convention and the open advice of
his superiors and had consequently been dismissed and
sent home in disgrace. They had had a daughter
and a son and then she had died--the London cold
and fog and damp almost a death sentence to someone of
Indian heritage.
  People are so strange, Babcott thought. Here's
a fine, brave, upstanding Englishman, a great
surgeon, with children who are half Indian--so
socially not acceptable in England--complaining about
Angelique's heritage. How stupid, and even
more stupid to hide from the truth.
  Yes, but don't you hide from it either. You're
twenty-eight, lots of time to get married, but will
you ever find a more exciting woman than
Angelique anywhere, let alone in Asia where
you will spend your working life?
  I won't, I know. Fortunately Struan will
probably marry her, so that's that. And I will
support him, by God! "Perhaps Mrs. Struan
is just being protective, like any mother," he said,
knowing how important Hoag's influence was with the
Struans, "and just opposed to him getting entangled
too young. That's understandable. He's tai-pan now
and that will take all of his energies. But don't
mistake me, I think Angelique is quite a
young lady, as courageous and fine a mate as
anyone could want--and to do a good job Malcolm
will need all the support he can get."
  Hoag heard the underlying passion, docketed it
and left the matter there, his mind suddenly back in
London where his sister and her husband were
bringing up his son and daughter, as always hating himself
for leaving India, bowing to convention and so killing her,
Arjumand the lovely.
  I must have been mad to take my darling into those
foul winters, dismissed, broke, with no job and
having to start all over again. Christ, I should have
stayed and battled the Company, eventually my
surgical skills would have forced them, forced them
to accept me and would have saved us ...
  The two sentries left on guard saluted as
they passed. In the dining room dinner was laid for
two. "Scotch or champagne?" Babcott
asked, then called out, "Lun!"
  "Champers. Shall I?"
  "I've got it." Babcott opened the wine that
waited in the Georgian silver ice bucket.
"Health! LUN!"
  "And happiness!" They clinked glasses.
"Perfect! How's your chef?"
  "Fair to awful but the quality of our seafood
is good, shrimps, prawns, oysters and dozens of
different kinds of fish. Where the devil's
Lun?" Babcott sighed. "That bugger needs
stick. Swear at him, will you?"
  But the butler's pantry was empty. Lun was
not in the kitchen. Eventually they found him in the
garden beside a pathway. He had been
decapitated, his head tossed aside. In its
place was the head of a monkey.

  "No, Lady," the mama-san said, very
afraid. "You cannot leave Ori-san here tomorrow, you
must leave at dawn."
  Sumomo said, "So sorry, Ori-san will
stay unt--"
  "So sorry, since the attack on Chief
Minister Anjo, the hunt for shishi is intense,
rewards for information are to the sky, with death for
anyone, anyone in a house harboring them."
  "That order's for Yedo, not here in
Kanagawa," Sumomo said.
  "So sorry, someone has talked," the
mama-san said, lips tight. Her name was
Noriko and they were alone in her private
quarters in her Inn of the Midnight Blossoms,
both kneeling on purple cushions, the room
candle-lit, a low table with tea on it between them and
she had just returned from an angry meeting with the
rice merchant moneylender who had raised the
interest rate on her mortgage from
thirty to thirty-five percent pleading the
dangerous state of the realm. Motherless dog, she
thought, seething, then compartmentalized that problem to deal
with the more dangerous one before her. "This morning we
heard that Enforcers are--"
  "Who?"
  "Enforcers? They're special, interrogating
Bakufu patrols, men without mercy. They
arrived in the night. I expect to be visited.
So sorry, at dawn he must go."
  "So sorry, you will keep him until he is
well."
  "I-dare-not! Not after the Inn of the Forty-seven
Ronin. Enforcers know no mercy. I don't
want this head spiked."
  "That was in Yedo, this is Kanagawa. This is
the Inn of the Midnight Blossoms. So sorry,
Hiraga-san would insist."
  "No one insists here, Lady," Noriko said
sharply. "Even Hiraga-san. I have my own
son to think of, and my House."
  "Correctly. And I have my brother's friend and
Hiraga's ally to think of. Also the face of my
brother to remember. I am empowered to settle his
debts."
  Noriko gaped at her. "All Shorin's
debts?"
  "Half now, half when sonno-joi
rules."
  "Done," Noriko said, so unbalanced with the
windfall she never expected to collect that she
failed to bargain. "But no gai-jin doctors, and
only a week."
  "Agreed." At once the girl reached into her
sleeve for the purse in a secret pocket.
Noriko sucked in her breath seeing the gold
coins. "Here are ten oban. You will give me a
receipt and his detailed account, the balance of the
half we have agreed, when we leave. Where can
Ori-san be safe?"
  Noriko cursed herself for being so hasty, but
having agreed, now it was a matter of face. As
she considered what to do she studied the girl in
front of her, Sumomo Anato, younger sister of
Shorin Anato, the shishi, the Wild One--the
boy she had initiated into the world of men so many
years ago. Eeee, what lust, what vigor for
one so young, she thought with a pleasant though untoward
ache. And what a memorable courtesan this girl
would make. Together we could earn a
fortune, in a year or two she would marry a
daimyo, and if she's still virgin what a pillow
price I could get! She's every bit as beautiful
as Shorin had said, classical Satsuma--according
to him samurai in every way. Every bit as beautiful.
"How old are you, Lady?"
  Sumomo was startled. "Sixteen."
  "Do you know how Shorin died?"
  "Yes. I will be revenged."
  "Hiraga told you?"
  "You ask too many questions," Sumomo said
sharply.
  Noriko was amused. "In the game we
play, you and I, though you are samurai and me
mama-san, we're sisters."
  "Oh?"
  "Oh yes, so sorry, the very serious game of
trying to cover for our men, to shield them from their
bravery, or stupidity, depending on which side you
are, risking our lives to protect them from themselves
merits trust on both sides. Trust of blood
sisters. So, Hiraga told you about Shorin?"
  Sumomo knew that her position was tenuous.
"Yes."
  "Hiraga is your lover?"
  Sumomo's eyes slitted. "Hiraga is,
was affianced to me before he ... before he left
to serve sonno-joi."
  The mama-san blinked. "A Satsuma
samurai allows his daughter to be betrothed to a
Choshu samurai--whether shishi or not, ronin or
not?"
  "My father, my father did not approve. Nor
my mother though Shorin did. I did not approve
their choice for me."
  "Ah, so sorry." Noriko was saddened, knowing
too well that that meant continual pressure,
confinement in their house, or even worse: "Are you
outcast from your family?"
  Sumomo stayed motionless, her voice remained
calm. "A few months ago I decided
to follow my brother, and Hiraga-san, to spare
my father that shame. Now I am ronin."
  "Are you mad? Women cannot become ronin."
  "Noriko," Sumomo said, gambling. "I
agree we should be blood sisters." A stiletto
appeared in her hand.
  Noriko blinked, not having seen where it had
appeared from. She watched as Sumomo pricked
her finger and offered her the knife. Without
hesitation she did the same and they touched fingers,
mixing their blood, then bowed gravely. "I am
honored. Thank you, Sumomo-san." Smiling
the mama-san returned the knife. "Now I am
a tiny tiny bit samurai, yes?"
  The knife slid back into the sleeve sheath.
"When the Emperor regains all his power, HE
will make those deserving it, samurai. We will
petition for you, Hiraga-san, Ori and I."
  Again Noriko bowed her thanks, loving that
idea but sure it was beyond possibility and that she
would never live to see the unthinkable happen: the day
the Toranaga Sh@ogunate ceased to be. "On
behalf of all my line, thank you. Now
sak`e!"
  "No thank you, so sorry, but Sensei
Katsumata made women in his class forswear
sak`e, telling us it would forever blunt our
skills and spoil our aim. Please, where is
Hiraga-san?"
  Noriko watched her, hiding her smile.
"Katsumata, the great Sensei? You studied under
him? Shorin told us you could use sword, knife
and shuriken. Is that true?"
  With dazzling speed Sumomo's hand went into her
obi, came out with a shuriken and hurtled the
small, razor-sharp, five-bladed circle of
steel across the room to thwakkk viciously into the
exact center of a post. She had hardly moved.
  "Please, where is Hiraga-san?" she asked
gently.

                 

                YEDO

  That night Hiraga led the silent charge up and
over the stockade of a daimyo's palace in the
second ring outside the castle walls and rushed
through the gardens for the back entrance of the mansion, the
night lit by a halfhearted moon. All six
men wore the same short, black, night-fighting
kimonos without armor for speed and quiet. All
had swords, knives and garrotes. All were
Choshu ronin Hiraga had summoned urgently
from Kanagawa for tonight's raid.
  Around the mansion the sprawling compound of
barracks, stables and servants' quarters that would
normally house five hundred warriors and the
daimyo's family and servants was
eerily empty. Only two sleepy sentries
were at the back door. These men saw the raiders
too late to sound an alarm and died. Akimoto
stripped one of his uniform and put it on, then
dragged the bodies into the undergrowth and rejoined the
others on the veranda. They waited, motionless,
listening intently. No warning shouts or they would have
abandoned the attack at once.
  "If we have to retreat, never mind,"
Hiraga had said at dusk when the others had
arrived in Yedo. "It's enough that we can penetrate
so close to the castle. Tonight's purpose is
terror, to kill and spread terror, to make them
believe no one and no place is beyond reach of us
or our spies. Terror, in and out quickly,
maximum surprise and no casualties.
Tonight's a rare opportunity." He smiled.
"When Anjo and the Elders cancelled
sankin-kotai, they dug the Sh@ogunate's
grave."
  "We fire the palace, Cousin?"'
Akimoto asked happily.
  "After the kill."
  "And he is?"'
  "He's old, grey hair and little of it, thin
and small, Utani, the roju Elder."
  They all gasped. "Daimyo of
Watasa?"'
  "Yes. Unfortunately I've never seen
him. Anyone?"'
  "I think I'd recognize him," the
eighteen-year-old youth said, a bad scar running
down the side of his face. "He's scrawny,
like a diseased chicken. I saw him once in
Ky@oto. So tonight we send an Elder onwards,
eh, a daimyo, eh? Good!" He grinned and
scratched at the scar, a legacy from the
unsuccessful Choshu attempt to seize the
Palace Gates in Ky@oto last spring.
"Utani won't be running anywhere after tonight.
He's mad to sleep outside the walls and let
it be known! And without guards? Stupid!"
  Joun, a seventeen-year-old, always the
cautious one, said, "Excuse me,
Hiraga-san, but are you sure this isn't a
trap baited with false information? Yoshi is
called the Fox, Anjo worse. We've heavy
prices on our heads, eh? I agree with my
brother, how could Utani be so stupid?"'
  "Because he has a secret
assignation. He's a pederast."
  They stared at him blankly. "Why should he
want to keep that secret?"'
  "The youth is one of Anjo's intimates."
  "So ka!" Joun's eyes glittered.
"Then I think I would keep that secret too.
But why should a pretty boy give himself to someone like
Utani when he already has a powerful patron?"'
  Hiraga shrugged. "Pay, what else?
Nori's a miser, Utani lavish--aren't his
peasants the most taxed in all Nippon?
Aren't his debts to the sky? Isn't he known for
consuming gold oban like grains of rice? Soon,
one way or another, Anjo will leave this earth.
Perhaps this pretty boy thinks Utani will
survive and the risk is worth it--Utani has
influence at Court, eh? Koku! Why not, his
family's probably destitute and drowning in
debt--aren't almost all samurai, below
hirazamurai rank, at poverty level?"'
  "True," they all agreed.
  "That's been true since the fourth
Sh@ogun," the eighteen-year-old said
bitterly, "almost two hundred years.
Daimyos take all the taxes, sell
samurai status to stinking merchants, more and more every
year, and still they cut our pay. Daimyos have
betrayed us, their loyal retainers!"
  "You're right," Akimoto said angrily.
"My father has to hire himself out as a farm
laborer to feed the rest of my brothers and sisters
..."
  "Ours has only his swords left, no
house, just a hut," Joun said. "We're so
deep in debt from great-grandfather's time we can never
repay the loans. Never."
  "I know how to settle those filthy money
worshippers, cancel their debts or kill them,"
another said. "If daimyos sometimes pay off
their debts like that, why not us?"'
  "A fine idea," Akimoto agreed, "but
it would cost you your head. Lord Ogama would make
an example of you, in case his own lenders
stopped advancing money against--what is it now,
against four years taxes ahead."
  Another said, "My family stipend hasn't
changed since Sekigahara, and the cost of rice
up a hundred times since then. We should become
merchants or sak`e brewers. Two uncles and
Elder Brother have given up their
swords and done that."
  "Terrible, yes, but I've thought of it
too."
  "Daimyos betrayed all of us."
  "Most have," Hiraga said. "Not all."
  "True," Akimoto said. "Never mind,
we'll choose our own daimyo when we've
expelled the barbarians and broken the Toranaga
Sh@ogunate. The new Sh@ogun will give us enough
to eat, us and our families, and better weapons,
even some of the gai-jin rifles."
  "He'll keep them for his own men, whoever he
is."
  "Why should he, Hiraga? There'll be enough for
everyone. Don't the Toranagas hoard five
to ten million koku yearly? That's more than enough
to arm us properly. Listen, if we're split
up in the dark, where do we regroup?"'
  "The House of Green Willows, south of
Fourth Bridge, not here. If that's too
difficult, hide somewhere and make your way back
to Kanagawa ..."
  Now on the veranda, listening carefully for
danger, enjoying the sensation, Hiraga smiled, his
heart beating well, feeling the joy of life and
approaching death, every day nearer. In a few
moments we move again. Action at long last ...
  For days he had been in the temple beside the
English Legation, waiting impatiently for an
opportunity to fire it but always too many enemy
troops, foreign and samurai. Each day acting
the gardener, spying, listening, planning--so easy
to kill the tall barbarian there who escaped the
Tokaid@o attack. Astonishing that only one
barbarian was killed out of the easy target of three
men and a woman.
  Ah, Tokaid@o! Tokaid@o means Ori
and Ori means Shorin, and they mean Sumomo who
is seventeen next month and I will not consider my
father's letter. I will not! I will not accept Ogama's
pardon if I have to recant sonno-joi. I will
follow its lodestone to whatever death it steers.
  Just me alive now. Ori is dead or will die
tomorrow. Shorin gone. And Sumomo?
  Last night tears had wet his cheeks, tears
from the dream that she was in, her bushido and fire and
perfume and body and beckoning and lost to him forever.
Impossible to sleep so sitting in the Lotus
seat, the Buddha position, using Zen to fly his
mind to peace.
  Then this morning, a gift of the gods, the
furtive, coded message from Koiko's
mama-san about Utani who had heard it, equally
secretly, from Koiko's maid. Eeee, he
thought gleefully, I wonder what Yoshi would do
if he knew our tentacles reached out even to his
bed, even around his balls?
  Confident now they were still undetected, he
jumped up and went to the door, used his knife,
sliding the bar back. Inside quickly. Akimoto
stayed on guard in the sentry's uniform. The
others followed Hiraga noiselessly up the
stairs towards the women's quarters, the route
already given to him. Everything was lavish, best
woods, finest tatamis, purest oiled paper for
shoji and most fragrant oils for lamps and
candles. Turning a corner. The unsuspecting
guard stared at him blankly. His mouth opened but
no sound came out. Hiraga's knife had
stopped it.
  He stepped over the body, went to the end of this
corridor, hesitated a moment to get his
bearings. Now a cul-de-sac. Either side were
walls of sliding shoji, rooms behind them. At the
end just one, bigger and more ornate than all the
others. An oil lamp burned within, also in some
of the other rooms. A few snores and heavy
breathing. Silently he motioned for Todo and
Joun to follow and the others to guard, then went forward
again like a night-hunting beast. The sound of heavy
breathing increased.
  A nod to Joun. At once the youth slipped
past him, crouched at the far door then, at
another sign from Hiraga, slid the shoji open.
Hiraga leapt into the room, then Todo.
  Two men were prone on the exquisite silk
quilts and futons, naked and joined, the youth
spread, the older over him, clutching him and
thrusting, panting and oblivious. Hiraga stood
over them, reared his sword on high and with two hands
gripping the hilt drove the point through the back of
both bodies just above the heart, burying it into the
tatami floor, impaling them.
  The old man gasped and died instantly, his
limbs quivering beyond death. The youth clawed
impotently, unable to turn, unable to move his
trunk, only his arms and legs and head but, even
so, he still could not twist enough to see what had happened
nor could he understand what had happened, only that his
life was somehow seeping away as all his
body opened. A howl of terror gathered in his
throat as Todo leapt forward and twined the
garrote to choke it back--just too late. Part
of the cry hung in the now fetid air.
  Instantly he with Hiraga whirled for the door,
all senses frenzied. Hiraga with knife
poised. Todo, Joun and those in the corridor
swords raised, hearts pounding, all ready
to charge, flee, fight, rush, die, but battle
and die proudly. Behind Hiraga the delicate
hands of the youth tore at his neck, his long,
perfect and painted nails gouging the flesh around the
wire. The fingers shuddered and stopped and fluttered
and stopped and fluttered. And were still.
  Silence. Somewhere a sleeper stirred
noisily, then returned to sleep. Still no
alarms or warning shouts. Gradually the raiders
wrenched themselves from the brink, numbed and
sweat-stained. Hiraga signalled the retreat.
  At once they obeyed except for Joun who
ran back into the room to recover Hiraga's
sword. He straddled the bodies but with all his
strength he could not pull the sword out or ease it
out. Hiraga waved him away, tried himself and
failed. On a low lacquered sword stand were the
weapons of the dead men. He picked one up. At
the door he looked back.
  In the clean, steady light of the oil lamp the
two bodies seemed like a single monstrous,
multilegged human-headed dragonfly, the
crumpled quilts its gorgeous wings, his sword
a giant silver pin. Now he could see the face
of the youth--it was quite beautiful.

  Yoshi was strolling on the battlements,
Koiko beside him, easily a head taller than
her. A chill was on the small wind and smell
of the sea at low tide. He did not notice it.
Again his eyes flicked from the city below to the moon and
he watched it, brooding. Koiko waited
patiently. Her kimono was the finest
Shan-tung with a scarlet under-kimono and her
hair, loosed informally, fell to her waist. His
kimono was ordinary, silk but ordinary and
swords ordinary, ordinary but sharp.
  "What are you thinking about, Sire?" she asked,
judging it time to dispel his gloom. Though they were quite
alone she kept her voice down, well aware that
nowhere within the castle walls was really secure.
  "Ky@oto," he said simply. As
quietly.
  "Will you accompany Sh@ogun Nobusada?"
  He shook his head though he had already decided
to go to Ky@oto before the formal party--the deception
habitual.
  Somehow I must stop that young fool and become the
sole channel between Emperor and Sh@ogunate,
he had been thinking, his mind assaulted with the
difficulties surrounding him: the madness of this
state visit, Anjo whose hold over the
Council had forced approval, Anjo with his
hatred and plotting, the trap I'm in here in the
castle, the multitude of enemies throughout the land,
the chief of them Sanjiro of Satsuma, Hiro
of Tosa and Ogama of Choshu who now holds the
Gates that are our birthright. And added to all
of those and waiting to pounce like salivating wolves
are the gai-jin.
  They have to be dealt with, permanently. The boy
Nobusada and the Princess have to be
neutralized, permanently.
  The permanent solution for the gai-jin is clear:
in any way we can devise, whatever the
sacrifice, we must become richer than them, and
better armed. This must be secret national
policy, now and forever. How to achieve this? I do
not know yet. But as policy we must flatter them
to sleep, keep them off balance, using their
foolish attitudes against them--and employ our
superior abilities to cocoon them.
  Nobusada? Equally clear. But he's not the
real threat. It's her. I don't have to worry
about him but her, Princess Yazu, she's the real
power behind him, and in front.
  The sudden, mental picture of her with a penis
and Nobusada the receiver made him smile. It
would make a wonderful shunga, he thought,
amused. Shunga were erotic, many-colored
woodcuts so popular and prized amongst Yedo's
traders and shopkeepers that had been proscribed
by the Sh@ogunate for a century or more as too
licentious for them, the lowest class, and too
easy to be used as lampoons against their betters.
In Nippon's immutable hierarchy, instituted
by the tair@o, Dictator Nakamura, then
made permanent by Sh@ogun Toranaga, first were
samurai, second farmers, third artisans of
every kind, and last, despised by all, merchants:
"leeches on all other labor," the Legacy
called them. Despised because all others
needed their skills and wealth--most of all their
wealth. Particularly samurai.
  So rules, certain rules, could be eased.
Thus in Yedo, Osaka and Nagasaki where the
really rich merchants lived, shunga, though
officially outlawed, were painted, carved and merrily
produced by the best artists and printmakers in the
land. In every epoch, artists vied with each other for
fame and fortune, selling them by the thousands.
  Exotic, explicit but always with gargantuan
genitalia, hilariously out of all proportion,
the best in perfect, moist, and mobile detail.
Equally prized, were ukiyo-every portraits of
leading actors, the constant meat of gossip,
scandal, and license--actresses were not permitted
by law, so specially trained men, onnagata,
played female roles--and, above all, prints
of the most famous courtesans. "I would like someone
to paint you. It's a pity Hiroshige and
Hokusai are dead."
  She laughed. "How should I pose, Sire?"
  "Not in bed," he said, laughing with her,
unusual for him to laugh, and she was pleased with the
victory. "Just walking along a street, with a
sunshade, green and pink, and wearing your pink and
green kimono with the carp of woven gold."
  "Perhaps, Sire, instead of a street, perhaps in a
garden at dusk catching fireflies?"
  "Ah, much better!" He smiled, remembering
the rare days of his youth on summer evenings when he
was released from studies. Then he and his brothers and
sisters and friends would go out into the fields and hunt
fireflies with gossamer nets and put the tiny
insects into tiny cages and watch the light
miraculously pulse on and off, composing
poems, laughing and larking with no
responsibilities, and young. "Like I feel with
you now," he muttered.
  "Sire?"
  "You take me out of myself, Koiko. Everything
about you."
  For answer she touched his arm, saying nothing and
everything, pleased with the compliment, all her mind
concentrated on him, wanting to read his thoughts and
needs, wanting to be perfect for him.
  But this game's tiring, she thought again. This
patron is too complex, too farsighted, too
unpredictable, too solemn and too difficult
to entertain. I wonder how long he will keep me.
I begin to hate the castle, hate
confinement, hate the constant testing, hate being
away from home and the ribald laughter and chatter
of the other ladies, Moonbeam, Springtime,
Petal and most of all my darling mama-san,
Meikin.
  Yes, but I glory being in the center of the world,
adore the one koku a day every day, exult that I
am who I am, handmaiden to the most noble lord who
is really just another man and, like all men, a
fractious little boy pretending to be complicated and
who can be controlled by sweets and spanking as always,
and who, if you are clever, decides to do only
what you have already decided he may do--whatever he
believes.
  Her laughter trilled.
  "What?"
  "You make me joyous, filled with life,
Sire. I shall have to call you Lord Giver of
Happiness!"
  Warmth pervaded him. "And so to bed?"
  "And so to bed."
  Arm in arm, they began to leave the moonlight.
"Look there," he said suddenly.
  Far below one of the palace mansions had caught
fire. Flames began gushing upwards, then more and
clouds of smoke. Now, faintly, they could hear
fire bells and see ants of people milling around, and
soon lines of other ants forming to join the fire
to the water tanks: Fire is our greatest
hazard, not woman, Sh@ogun Toranaga had
written in his Legacy with rare humor. Against
fire we can be prepared, never against woman.
All men and all women of marriageable age will be
married. All habitations will have tanks of water
within easy reach.
  "They will never put it out, will they, Sire?"
  "No. I suppose some fool has knocked
over a lamp or candle," Yoshi said, his lips
tight.
  "Yes, you are right, Sire, the clumsy
fool," she said at once, gentling him, sensing
an unexpected anger in him--and not knowing why.
"I am so glad you are in charge of fire
precautions in the castle so we can sleep
safely. Whoever did it should be talked
to severely. I wonder whose palace it is."
  "It's the Tajima residence."
  "Ah, Sire, you continue to amaze me,"
Koiko said with touching admiration, "how wonderful
to be able to distinguish one palace from
another amongst the hundreds so quickly, and from so far
away." She bowed to hide her face, sure it was
the Watasa and that now daimyo Utani must be
dead and the raid successful. "You are wonderful."
  "No, it is you who are wonderful,
Koiko-chan." He smiled down at her, so
sweet and tiny and observant and dangerous.
  Three days ago his new spy, Misamoto,
ever anxious to prove his worth, had reported the
rumors circulating in the barracks about the tryst
of Utani and the pretty boy. He had ordered
Misamoto to allow the secret to be overheard
by Koiko's maid, who was certain to whisper it
to either her mistress or their mama-san or both,
if other rumors were true: that this same
mama-san, Meikin, was an avid supporter of
sonno-joi, and that clandestinely she allowed her
house to be a meeting place and sanctuary for
shishi. The news would be passed to shishi who would
instantly react at such a marvelous
opportunity for a major kill. For almost two
years his spies had kept her and her House under
surveillance, both for this reason and because of the growing
stature of Koiko.
  But never once had the merest scrap of evidence
appeared to support the theory and condemn them.
  Ah, but now, he thought, watching the flames,
Utani must be dead if the palace is fired and
now I have real evidence: a whisper planted in a
maid has born evil fruit. Utani was--
is--a coup for them. As I would be, even more so.
A small shudder touched him.
  "Fire frightens me," she said, misinterpreting
the shudder, wanting to give him face.
  "Yes. Come along, we'll leave them to their
karma." Arm in arm they walked away, Yoshi
finding it hard to conceal his excitement. I wonder
what your karma is, Koiko. Did your maid
tell you and you told her to tell the mama-san and
are part of the chain?
  Perhaps, perhaps not. I saw no change in you when
I said Tajima instead of Watasa, and I was
watching very carefully. I wonder. Of course you
are suspect, always were suspect, why else should
I choose you, doesn't this add spice to my
bed? It does, and you are everything your reputation
promised. Truly I am more than satisfied,
so I will wait. But now it is easy to trap you,
so sorry, even easier to extract the truth from
your maid, from this not-so-clever mama-san
and from you, pretty one! Too easy, so sorry,
when I close the trap.
  Eeee, that will be a hard decision because now,
thanks to Utani, I have a secret and direct
line to the shishi, to use to uncover them, destroy
them or even to use them against my enemies, at my
whim. Why not?
  Tempting!
  Nobusada? Nobusada and .his
Princess? Very tempting! He began to laugh.
  "I am so happy you're so happy tonight,
Sire."

  Princess Yazu was in tears. For almost two
hours she had used every practice that she had ever
read or seen in pillow books to excite him and
though she had succeeded in making him strong, before he
could achieve the Clouds and the Rain he had failed
her. Then, as usual, he had burst into tears,
raving in a paroxysm of nervous coughing that it was her
fault. As usual the tempest vanished quickly,
he begged forgiveness, nestled close to kiss her
breasts, falling asleep suckling a breast,
curled in her lap.
  "It's not fair," she whimpered, exhausted
and unable to sleep. I must have a son or he is
as good as dead and so am I, at the very least so
shamed that I will have to shave my head and become a
Buddhist nun ... oh ko, oh ko ...
  Even her ladies had not been able to help.
"You're all experienced, most of you married,
there must be some way to make my Lord a man,"
she had shouted at them after weeks of trying, both
she and they aghast that she had lost her temper.
"Find out! It is your duty to find out."
  Over the months her court had consulted
herbalists, acupuncturists, doctors, even
soothsayers to no avail. This morning she had
sent for her chief Matron. "There has to be a
way! What do you advise?"'
  "You are only sixteen, Honored
Princess," the Matron had said on her
knees, "and your Lord sixteen an--"'
  "But everyone conceives by that time, far earlier, almost
everyone. What's the matter with him, or with me?"'
  "Nothing with thee, Princess, we have told you
many times, the doctors assure us that nothing with thee
is wr--"'
  "What about this gai-jin doctor, the giant
I've heard about? One of my maids
told me it's rumored he does miracle
cures of all kinds of aliments, perhaps he could
cure my Lord."
  "Oh so sorry, Highness," the woman had
burst out, appalled, "it's unthinkable that he or
you would consult a gai-jin! Please have patience,
please. Cheng-sin, the marvelous soothsayer
told us patience will surely ..."
  "It could be done secretly, fool!
Patience? I've waited months!" she had
shrieked. "Months of patience and still my Lord
hasn't yet the glimmerings of an heir!" Before
she could stop herself she had slapped the woman's
face. "Ten months of patience and ill
advice is too much, you miserable person, go
away! Go! GO AWAY FOREVER!"
  All day she had planned for tonight. Special
dishes that he liked were prepared, well seasoned
with ginseng. Special sak`e laced with ginseng and
powdered rhinoceros horn. Special perfumes,
heavily aphrodisiac. Special prayers to the
Buddha. Special supplications to Ameratsu,
the Sun Goddess, grandmother of the god Niniji who
came down from Heaven to rule Nippon who was
great-grandfather of the first mortal Emperor,
Jimmu-Tennu, founder of their Imperial
Dynasty, twenty-five centuries ago--and
therefore her direct ancestress.
  But all had failed.
  Now it was in the black time of the night and she
wept silently, lying on her set of futons,
her husband asleep on his beside her, not happy in
sleep, a cough now and then, his limbs jerking, his
sleeping face not unpleasing to her. Poor silly
boy, she thought anguished, is it your karma to die
heirless like so many of your line? Oh ko oh ko
oh ko! Why did I allow myself to be talked
into this disaster, out of the arms of my beloved prince?
  Four years ago when she was twelve, andwiththe
delighted approval of her mother, last and most
favorite consort of her father, Emperor Ninko,
who had died the year she was born, andwiththe equally
delighted and necessary acquiescence of the Emperor
Komei, her much older stepbrother who had
succeeded him, she was happily affianced to a
childhood playmate, Prince Sugawara.
  That was the year the Bakufu formally signed the
Treaties that opened Yokohama and Nagasaki,
against Emperor Komei's wishes, the majority
of the Court, and the outspoken advice of
most daimyos. That was the year sonno-joi
became a battle cry. And the same year the then
tair@o, Ii, proposed to the Prince
Advisor that the Princess Yazu marry the
Sh@ogun Nobusada.
  "So sorry," the Advisor said.
"Impossible."
  "Very possible and highly necessary to bond the
Sh@ogunate to the Imperial Dynasty and bring
further peace and tranquility to the land," Ii
had said. "There are many historical precedents
when Toranagas have agreed to marry
Imperials."
  "So sorry." The Advisor was effete,
elaborately dressed and coiffured, his teeth
blackened. "As you well know Her Imperial
Highness is already engaged to be married as soon as
she reaches puberty. As you well know, too, the
Sh@ogun Nobusada is also engaged to the
daughter of a Ky@oto noble."
  "So sorry, engagements of such illustrious
persons are a matter of state policy, in
Sh@ogunate control and always has been," Ii
said. He was small, portly and inflexible,
"Sh@ogun Nobusada's engagement, at his own
request, has ceased."
  "Ah, so sorry, how sad. I heard it was
a good match."
  "Sh@ogun Nobusada and Princess Yazu
are the same age, twelve. Please advise the
Emperor, the tair@o wishes to inform him the
Sh@ogun will be honored to accept her as wife.
They can marry when she is fourteen or
fifteen."
  "I will consult the Emperor but, so sorry,
I am afraid your request will not be possible."
  "I certainly hope the Son of Heaven will be
guided by Heaven on such an important
decision. The gai-jin are at our gates, the
Sh@ogunate and Dynasty must be strengthened."
  "So sorry, the Imperial Dynasty needs
no strengthening. As to the Bakufu, obedience to the
wishes of the Emperor would surely improve the
peace."
  Ii said harshly, "The Treaties had to be
signed. The barbarian fleets and weapons can
humble us whatever we say publicly!
We-are-defenseless! We were forced to sign!"
  "So sorry, that is the problem and fault of the
Bakufu and Sh@ogunate--Emperor
Komei did not approve the Treaties and did
not wish them signed."
  "Foreign policy, any temporal
policy, such as the marriage I so humbly
suggest, is the absolute province of the
Sh@ogunate. The Emperor ..." Ii chose
his words carefully, "... is preeminent in all
other matters."
  ""Other matters"? A few centuries
ago, the Emperor ruled as was custom for
millennia."
  "So sorry, we do not live a few
centuries ago."
  When Ii's proposal, considered by all those
opposed to the Bakufu as an insult to the
Dynasty, became known there was a general outcry.
Within a few weeks shishi had assassinated him
for his arrogance and the matter lapsed.
  Until two years later when she was fourteen.
  Though not yet a woman Imperial Princess
Yazu was already an accomplished poetess, could
read and write classical Chinese, knew all
the court rituals necessary to her future, and was still
enamored with her prince and he with her.
  Anjo, needing to enhance the prestige of the
Sh@ogunate, increasingly under threat, again
approached the Prince Advisor who repeated
what he had already said. Anjo repeated what Ii
had already said but added to the astonishment of his
adversary, "Thank you for your opinion but, so
sorry, Imperial Chancellor Wakura does
not agree."
  Wakura was in his forties, a man of high
court rank though not of the nobility who, from the
beginning, had assumed leadership of the xenophobic
movement amongst middle-ranking nobles opposed
to the Treaties. As Chancellor, he was one of the
few who had Imperial access.
  Within days Wakura sought an interview with the
Princess. "I am pleased to tell you that the
Son of Heaven requests you agree to annul your
engagement to Prince Sugawara and marry
Sh@ogun Nobusada instead."
  Princess Yazu almost fainted. Within the
Court an Imperial request was a command.
"There must be some mistake! The Son of Heaven
opposed this arrogant suggestion two years ago
for obvious reasons. You are opposed, so is
everyone--I cannot believe the Godhead would ask
such a hideous thing."
  "So sorry, but it is not hideous and it is
asked."
  "Even so I refuse--I refuse!"
  "You cannot, so sorry. May I explain
th--"'
  "No you may not! I refuse, I refuse
I refuse!"
  The next day another interview requested and
refused, then another and another. She was equally
inflexible. "No."
  "So sorry, Highness," her Chief
Matron said, very flustered. "The Imperial
Chancellor again requests a moment to explain why
this is asked of you."
  "I will not see him. Tell him I wish
to see my brother!"
  "Oh so sorry, Highness," the Chief
Matron said, appalled, "please excuse me
but it is my duty to remind you the Son of Heaven
has no kith or kin once he has ascended."
  "I ... of course, please excuse me,
I know. I'm, I'm overwrought, please
excuse me." Even within the Court only the
Emperor's wife, consorts, mother, children, his
brothers and sisters, and two or three
Councillors, were allowed to look him in the face
without permission. Outside of these few intimates
it was forbidden. HE was divine.
  Like all Emperors before him, from the very moment
Komei had completed the rituals that mystically
joined his spirit to that of the recently deceased
Emperor, his father, as his father had joined with his, and
he had with his in unbroken line back
to Jimmu-Tennu, he had ceased to be mortal and
became a Deity, the Keeper of the Sacred
Symbols--the Orb and Sword and Mirror--the
Son of Heaven.
  "Please excuse me," Yazu said
humbly, appalled at her sacrilege.
"I'm sorry I ... Please ask the Lord
Chancellor to petition the Son of Heaven to grant
me a moment of his time."
  Now, through her tears, Yazu was remembering
how, many days later she was on her knees before the
Emperor and his ever present multitude of
courtiers, heads bowed, she hardly recognizing
him in his formal swirling robes--the first time she
had seen him for months. She had begged and pleaded
in a litany of weeping, using the necessary court
language hardly understood by outsiders,
until she was spent. "Imperial Highness, I
do not want to leave home, I do not want to go to this
foul place Yedo, the other side of the world, I
beg leave to say we are the same blood, we
are not Yedo upstart warlords ..." And had
wanted to screech, We are not descended from
peasants who do not speak properly, dress
properly, eat properly, act properly, cannot
read or write properly and stink of daikon--
but she dared not. Instead she said, "I beg you,
leave me be."
  "First: please go and listen carefully and
calmly as befits an Imperial Princess
to what the Lord Chancellor Wakura has
to say."
  "I will obey, Imperial Highness."
  "Second, I will not allow this against your will.
Third, return on the tenth day, then we will
talk again. Go now, Yazu-chan." It was the first
time in her life that her brother had called her by the
diminutive.
  So she had listened to Wakura.
  "The reasons are complicated, Princess."
  "I am accustomed to complications,
Chancellor."
  "Very well. In return for the Imperial
betrothal, the Bakufu have agreed to the permanent
expulsion of all gai-jin and to cancel the
Treaties."
  "But Nori Anjo has said this is
impossible."
  "True. At this time. But he has agreed
at once to start modernizing the army and at once
to build an invincible navy. In seven, eight,
perhaps ten years he promises we will be strong enough
to enforce our will."
  "Or in twenty or fifty or a hundred
years! The Toranaga Sh@oguns are historic
liars and not to be trusted. For centuries they have
kept the Emperor confined and usurped his
heritage. They are not to be trusted."
  "So sorry, now the Emperor is persuaded
to trust them. In truth, Princess, we have no
temporal power over them."
  "Then I would be a fool to give myself as
hostage."
  "So sorry, but I was going to add that your
marriage would lead to a healing between Emperor and
Sh@ogunate which is essential to the tranquility
of the State. The Sh@ogunate would then
listen to Imperial advice and obey Imperial
wishes."
  "If they became filial. But how would my
marriage bring that to pass?"'
  "Would not the Court, through you, be able to intervene,
even to control this youthful Sh@ogun and his
government?"'
  Her interest had quickened. "Control? On
behalf of the Emperor?"'
  "Of course. How could this boy--compared with
you, Highness, he a child--how could this boy have any
secrets from you? Of course not. Surely the
Exalted's hope is that you, his sister, would be his
go-between. As wife of the Sh@ogun you would know
everything, and a remarkable person such as yourself could
soon have all the threads of Bakufu power within your
hands, through this Sh@ogun. Since the third
Toranaga Sh@ogun there has never been a
strong one. Would you not be perfectly placed
to hold the real power?"'
  She had thought about that for a long time. "Anjo
and the Sh@ogunate aren't fools. They would have
deduced that."
  "They do not know you, Highness. They believe you
are only a reed to be twisted and shaped and used
at their whim, just like the boy Nobusada, why
else did they choose him? They want the
marriage, yes, to enhance their prestige,
certainly to bring Court and Sh@ogunate closer.
Of course, you, a girl, would be their pliant
puppet, to subvert Imperial will."
  "So sorry, you ask too much of a woman.
I do not want to leave home, nor give up my
Prince."
  "The Emperor asks that you do this."
  "Once again the Sh@ogunate is forcing him
to barter, when they should just obey," she had said
bitterly.
  "The Emperor asks that you assist to make them
obey."
  "Please excuse me, I cannot."
  "Two years ago, the bad year,"
Wakura continued in the same measured way, "the
year of famines, the year Ii signed the
Treaties, certain Bakufu scholars were searching
history for examples of deposed Emperors."
  Yazu gasped, "They would never dare--not
that!"
  "The Sh@ogunate is the Sh@ogunate, they
are all-powerful, at the moment. Why
shouldn't they consider removing an obstacle, any
obstacle? Did he not, his wa destroyed, even
consider abdicating in favor of his son, Prince
Sachi."
  "Rumor," she burst out, "that cannot be
true."
  "I believe it was, Imperial
Princess," he said gravely. "And now, in
truth, He asks, please will you help
him?"'
  Beyond herself, she knew whatever she said, it would
always return to the "ask." No way out. In the
end she would have to comply or become a nun. Her
mouth opened for the final refusal but it never
happened. Something seemed to sever in her mind and,
for the first time, she began thinking by a different
process, no longer child but adult, and this gave
her the answer. "Very well," she said, deciding
to keep her own counsel. "I will agree,
providing I continue to live in Yedo as I have
lived in the Imperial Palace ..."
  That conversation had brought her to this night's
silence, broken only by her weeping.
  Yazu sat up in the bed and wiped her tears
away. Liars, she thought bitterly, they
promised me, but even on that they cheated. A
slight sound from Nobusada and he turned in his
sleep. In the lamplight without which he could not
sleep he looked more boyish than ever, more like a
younger brother than husband--so young, so very young.
Kind, considerate, always listening to her, taking her
advice, no secrets from her, everything that
Wakura had foretold. But unsatisfying.
  My darling Sugawara, now impossible--in this
lifetime.
  A shiver went through her. The window was open.
She leaned on the lintel, hardly noticing the
mansion below that was gutted and smoldering, other
fires spotted here and there throughout the city,
moonlight on the sea beyond--smell of burning on
the wind, dawn lightening the eastern sky.
  Her secret resolve had not changed from that day
with Wakura: to spend this life wrecking the
Sh@ogunate who had wrecked this lifetime, to rip
away their power by any means, to return that power
to the Godhead.
  I will destroy as they destroyed me, she thought,
far too wise now to even whisper it down a
well. I begged not to come here, begged not to have
to marry this boy and though I like him, I
loathe this hateful place, loathe these hateful people.
  I want to go home! I will go home. That will
make this life bearable. We will make this visit
whatever Yoshi does or says, whatever anyone
does or says. We will go home--and
we-will-stay-there!


















             BOOK TWO

                 

    Monday, 13th October:
  In brilliant midday sunshine ten days
later, Phillip Tyrer sat at a desk on
the veranda of the Yedo Legation contentedly practicing
Japanese calligraphy, brush and ink and
water, surrounded by dozens of filled and discarded
pages of rice paper, astonishingly inexpensive
here compared with England. Sir William had sent
him to Yedo to prepare for the first meeting with the
Elders.
  His brush stopped abruptly. Captain
Settry Pallidar and ten equally immaculate
dragoons were riding up the hill. As they came
into the square the samurai there, many more than before,
parted to allow them access. Slight, stiff bows
acknowledged by a slight stiff salute, clearly
a newly established protocol. Redcoat
sentries, many more than before, opened the iron
gates and closed them after the troops had
clattered into the high-walled forecourt.
  "Hello, Settry," Tyrer called out,
running down the main steps to greet him.
"Good God, you're a sight for sore eyes, where
the devil did you come from?"
  "Yokohama, old boy, where else? Came
by boat." As Pallidar dismounted one of the
gardeners, hoe in hand, was already hurrying in a
half-bowing run to hold the bridle. When
Pallidar saw him, his hand went to his holster.
"Get away!"
  "He's all right, Settry. He's
Ukiya, one of our regulars and always very
helpful. Domo, Ukiya," Tyrer said.
  "Hai, Taira-sama, domo."
Hiraga put on a vacant smile, his face
half obscured by the coolie hat he wore,
bowed and did not move.
  "Get away," Pallidar repeated.
"Sorry, Phillip, but I don't like any of the
buggers near me, particularly with a bloody hoe
in his hand. Grimes!"
  Instantly the dragoon was there and he shoved
Hiraga away roughly, taking the bridle.
"Hop it, Jappo! Piss off!"
  Hiraga obediently bobbed his head, kept the
vacuous grin in place and moved away. But he
stayed within easy listening distance, bottling his
desire to avenge the insult instantly--with the
razor-sharp hoe, the small stiletto hidden in
his hat or with his iron-hard hands.
  "Why on earth come by boat?" Tyrer was saying.
  "To save time. Patrols report extra
Jappo barricades all along the Tokaid@o
and traffic jams all the way from Hodogaya
to Yedo, worse than Piccadilly Circus on
the Queen's birthday, making everyone more nervous
than usual. Have a dispatch from Sir William,
he's ordering the Legation closed and you and your
staff back--I'm your escort for "face.""
  Tyrer stared at him. "But what about the meeting?
I've been working like the devil to get everything
ready."
  "Don't know, old boy. Here."
  Tyrer broke the seals on the official letter:

P. Tyrer, Esq., British Legation,
Yedo: This is to inform you I have agreed with the
Bakufu to postpone the meeting from October 20th
to Monday, November 3rd. To save unnecessary
expense in troops, you and your staff will return
immediately with Captain Pallidar.
                                  
  "Three cheers! Yokohama here I come."
  "When do you want to leave?"
  "Immediately, the Great White Father says,
immediately it will be. Can't wait. How about after
lunch? Come and sit down. What's new in
Yokopoko?"
  "Not much." As they strolled back up to the
veranda and easy chairs, Hiraga moved under the
lee and continued hoeing.
  Pallidar lit a cheroot. "Sir
William, the General and Admiral had another
bash at the local governor and Bakufu,
swearing they would have his guts for garters if they
didn't produce Canterbury's murderers--and
now Lun's, pretty bloody awful, what?
All they got was the usual fawning and, Ah so
sorry, we're watching all roads, all paths
to catch them, so sorry for delays and
inconvenience! Oh, says Sir William, then
you know who they are? Oh no, says the Jappo,
but if we check all papers and watch everyone,
perhaps we'll find them, we do everything possible,
please to help by being more careful of
revolutionaries. A lot of balls! They could
catch them if they wanted. They're liars."
  "Terrible about Lun. Ghastly! I went
into shock. Sir William almost had a stroke.
Still no sign of how the murderers got into our
place at Kanagawa?"
  "Nothing, any more than last time." Pallidar
had noted the many pages filled with practice
characters but did not comment. He loosened his collar.
"The Corporal left in charge was demoted and
he and the other two given fifty lashes for
dereliction of duty. Stupid not to be sharp after the
other attack. But why the monkey's head?"
  Tyrer shuddered. "Sir William thinks it was
because Lun jeered at their Delegation, called them
"monkeys" and it was their form of revenge."
  Pallidar whistled. "That means at least one of
them, unbeknownst to our people, secretly understands
English--or at the very least pidgin."
  "We came to the same conclusion." With an
effort Tyrer threw off his fear. "To hell with that,
I'm delighted to see you. What else is
new?"
  Pallidar was idly watching Hiraga. "The
General believes there's more to the increased
barricades and native troop movements than
meets the eye. The traders say their
Jappo contacts whisper that all roads out of
Yedo are strangled and that the real reason's
civil war's brewing. Damn nuisance not knowing.
We should be moving around like the Treaty allows, should
be finding out for ourselves--the General and Admiral
agree for once we should operate here like in
India, anywhere else, send out patrols or a
regiment or two to show the flag, by God, and
contact some of the discontented kings to use them against the
others. Do you have a beer?"
  "Oh of course, sorry. Chen!"
  "Yes Mass'r?"
  "Beeru chop chop." Tyrer said, not at all
sure his friend's militancy was the correct
approach. The foreman of the gardeners came nearer
and stood in the garden below and bowed deeply.
To Pallidar's surprise Tyrer bowed back
though his bow was slight. "Hai, Shikisha?
Nan desu ka?" Yes, Shikisha, what do you
want?
  With even more astonishment Pallidar listened as the
man asked something, Tyrer replied fluently and
their conversation went back and forth. At length the
man bowed and left. "Hai, Taira-sama,
domo."
  "My God, Phillip, what was all that
about?"
  "Eh? Oh, old Shikisha? It was just that he
wanted to know if it was all right for the gardeners
to prepare the garden in the back. Sir William
wants fresh vegetables, cauliflower,
onions, brussels sprouts, baking potatoes
and ... what's the matter?"
  "You're really speaking Jappo then?"
  Tyrer laughed. "Oh no, not really, but
I've been cooped up here for ten days with nothing
to do so I've been swotting and trying to learn words
and phrases. Actually, though Sir William
read me the Riot Act about pulling my finger out,
I'm enjoying it immensely. I get a
tremendous charge out of being able to communicate."
Fujiko's face leapt to the forefront of his
mind, communicating with her, the hours spent with her
--the last time ten days ago when he had returned
to Yokohama for a day and the night. Hooray for
Sir William, tonight or tomorrow I'll see her
again, wonderful.
  "Wonderful!" he said without thinking, beaming.
"Oh," he added hastily, "oh, er, yes, I
enjoy trying to speak and read and write
it. Old Shikisha's given me lots of words,
mostly work words, and Ukiya," he pointed
to Hiraga who was gardening industriously, always within
distance, not knowing that "Ukiya" was an alias and
just meant "gardener," "he's helping me with
writing--jolly intelligent fellow for a
Japanese."
  During a writing lesson yesterday, he
checked rumors he had heard, he asked him with
signs and words Poncin had given him, to write
the characters for "war," senso, and "soon,"
jiki-ni. Then he combined his crudely written
attempts as "war, in Nippon, soon.
Please?"'
  He had seen a sudden change and surprise.
"Gai-jin toh nihon-go ka?"'
Foreigners and Japanese?
  "Iy`e, Ukiya. Nihonjin to
nihonjin." No, Ukiya, Japanese and
Japanese.
  The man had laughed suddenly and Tyrer had
seen how good-looking he was and how different from the
other gardeners, wondering why he was seemingly so
much more intelligent than the others, though, unlike
the British equivalent worker, most Japanese
could read and write. "Nihonjin tsuneni
senso nihonjin! Japanese are always
fighting Japanese," Ukiya had said with
another laugh and Tyrer laughed with him, liking him
even more.
  Tyrer grinned at Pallidar. "Come on,
what's new? Not business, for goodness' sake,
Angelique?"
  Pallidar grunted. "Oh, are you interested in
her?" he asked flatly, greatly savoring the
joke inside himself.
  "Not at all." Tyrer was equally flat,
equally teasing, and they chuckled together.
  "Tomorrow's the engagement party."
  "Lucky Malcolm! Thank God I'm
released, marvelous! I'd hate to miss that
party. How is she?"
  "As pretty as ever. We had her as guest of
honor at the mess. She arrived looking like a
goddess, escorted by the frog Minister, pompous
ass, and that Andr`e Poncin chap--don't like either
of them. It was--"
  "Andr`e's rather nice actually--he's helping
me a lot with my Japanese."
  "Perhaps he is but I don't trust
him. There's a long article in the Times about the
coming European conflict: France and probably
Russia against Germany. We'll be dragged in
again."
  "That's one war we can do without. You were saying?"
  An immense grin. "It was a terrific
evening. Had one dance with her. It was smashing. A
polka--danced my heart out. Close up her,
well, without being disrespectful, I have to say her
bosoms are like milk and honey and her perfume
..." For a moment Pallidar was reliving that heady
moment, the center of attention on the hastily
constructed dance floor, gorgeous sparkling
uniforms, she the only woman present, candles
and oil lamps and the Guards Band playing
lustily, dancing on and on, the perfect couple,
everyone else consumed with jealousy. "Don't mind
admitting I envy Struan."
  "How is he?"
  "Eh? Oh, Struan? Slightly better so
the story goes. I haven't seen him but they say
he's out of bed. I asked Angelique and she
only said, He's much better." Another beam.
"The new doctor, Dr. Hoag, their family
doctor has taken over. I hear he's
pretty damn good." Pallidar finished his beer.
Another appeared from the ever attentive Chen,
smiling and round and a pattern of Lim, equally a
plant, and also a distant cousin of the Struan
compradore. "Thanks." Pallidar sipped it
appreciatively. "Damn good beer."
  "It's local. Ukiya says
Japanese've brewed it for years, the best from
Nagasaki. I imagine they copied some
Portuguese beer years centuries ago.
What else's new?"
  Pallidar looked at Tyrer thoughtfully.
"What do you make of Hoag's assassin story?
The operation and mysterious girl?"
  "Don't know what to think. I thought I
recognized one of them, remember? The fellow was
wounded in exactly the same place. Everything
adds up. Pity you and Marlowe didn't catch
him. Ironic if one of our side cured him, so
that he can murder more of us." Tyrer dropped his
voice, always servants nearby and soldiers.
"Between you and me, old boy, Sir William's
sending for more troops and ships from Hong Kong."
  "I'd heard the same. It'll be war soon,
or we'll have to intervene if they start
fighting amongst themselves ..."
  Hiraga was listening carefully as he weeded and
hoed, and though he missed many words he caught the
marrow and their news confirmed his own, increasing his
worries.
  After setting the Utani mansion on fire, he
and his friends had reached their nearby safe house without
incident. Todo and others wanted to return
to Kanagawa as soon as the barriers opened at
dawn, and left. He, Joun, and Akimoto
decided to remain in hiding at separate
dwellings, to await an opportunity to attack
the Legation.
  That same dawn with eerie, unprecedented speed
the Bakufu doubled the barriers on the
Tokaid@o, and extended their grasp on all the
four main trunk roads and all roads, paths
and even tracks leading out of Yedo. With
stepped-up surveillance, this effectively
locked them in, along with all shishi and other
antagonists throughout the capital.
  Four days ago the mama-san Noriko sent
a letter from Kanagawa, saying that with all the
increased, hostile activity, this was her first
opportunity, relating about Ori and Sumomo
and the gai-jin doctor, and ended:

Still no sign of Todo and the other two shishi--
they have vanished without trace. We know they passed
the first barrier but nothing more. We fear they were
betrayed and you are betrayed. Escape while you
can. Ori is much stronger every day, his wound still
clean. I have sent him to safety near
Yokohama--the last place the Bakufu will
expect him to go. Your Lady refuses to leave
without your order--send it at once for I fear that
my House is being watched. If we are
attacked seek word from Raiko, the House of the
Three Carp at Yokohama. News of
Utani's assassination speeds throughout Nippon,
and terror with it. Sonno-joi!

  He began to write a reply but her messenger
was very afraid. "Getting here was terrible,
Hiraga-san. Barrier guards are ordering
everyone to strip completely, men women even children,
in case messages are hidden in loincloths. It
happened to me, Sire."
  "Then how did you escape?"'
  The messenger pointed to his bottom.
"I enclosed the letter in a small metal tube,
Hiraga-san. I do not want to risk that again,
some guards are very wise in the ways of smugglers.
Please trust me with a spoken message."
  "Then give your mistress my thanks and
hopes and tell Sumomo-san to report
to Shinsaku at once." Hiraga had used his
father's private name that only she would know, and would
therefore be sure the order to return home had come
from him. He paid the man. "Be careful."
  "Karma."
  Yes, karma, Hiraga thought and began
to concentrate again on the foreign words, glad that
Ori was alive, enjoying the joke that indeed a
gai-jin had saved Ori to kill more gai-jin, as
he himself would kill these two. During their
retreat, during the confusion of leaving I could do it,
if not both then one of them, whoever is the first
target. Eeee, all gods, if you exist,
watch and guard Sumomo. Good that she resisted
her parents, good she journeyed to my parents'
home in Choshu, good she came to Kanagawa, more
than good that she dares to join me in battle--she
will be a worthy mother to my generations, if that is my
karma. Therefore much better she goes home
to safety. Better she is in Choshu far from
danger ...
  His ears caught the word "Shimonoseki."
The gai-jin officer was talking volubly and
seemed quite excited, and though most of the words were
lost, Hiraga gleaned that cannon had fired on
some ships in the Straits, had killed some
sailors, and that all gai-jin were furious because the
Straits were essential to their shipping.
  Yes, it is, Hiraga thought with grim
amusement, which is exactly why you will never have our
Straits. With the cannon we have even now we can
close them and keep them closed to any barbarian
fleet--and soon our Dutch-built and designed
armament factory will be casting sixty-pounders,
completing three a month, with gun carriages!
  The tide has turned in our favor at long
last: Lord Ogama of Choshu, alone of all
daimyo, obeys the Emperor's wish to attack
and expel the gai-jin; correctly he and Choshu
troops firmly hold the palace gates;
Katsumata is gathering all shishi to ambush and
destroy the Sh@ogun, unbelievably winkled out
of his lair, on the way to Ky@oto; and now our
grip tightens on the gai-jin's
citadel, Yokohama ...
  Abruptly all attention in the forecourt went
to the barred and guarded gates as shouting erupted.
Hiraga's stomach turned over. A samurai
officer at the head of a patrol under the banners
of the Bakufu, and personal insignia of
Toranaga Yoshi, was loudly demanding entrance,
the redcoated soldiers telling him, as loudly,
to go away. Just behind him, bound and battered and cowed,
was Joun--his shishi comrade.
  A bugler sounded the alarm. All troops
inside the walls rushed to action stations, some with
half-buttoned uniforms and hatless but all with
rifles, full magazines and bayonets, all
gardeners were on their knees, heads into the earth--
Hiraga, caught off guard, remained standing for a
moment then hastily followed suit feeling totally
naked. Warriors, massed in the square, began
collecting ominously.
  Shakily Tyrer got to his feet. "What the
devil's up?"
  With studied slowness Pallidar said, "I
suppose we'd better find out." He got up
leisurely, saw the Captain in charge of the
Legation guards at the doorway queasily opening
his holster. "'morning, I'm Captain
Pallidar."
  "Captain McGregor. Glad you're here,
yes, very glad."
  "Shall we?"
  "Yes."
  "How many troops do you have here?"
  "Fifty."
  "Good, more than enough. Phillip, nothing
to worry about," Pallidar said to reassure him,
outwardly calm but his adrenaline circulating
strongly. "You're ranking official, perhaps you should
ask him what he wants. We'll escort you."
  "Yes, yes very good." Striving to appear
calm, Tyrer put on his top hat, straightened
his frock coat and walked down the steps, all
eyes on him. The dragoons watched only
Pallidar, awaiting his orders. Five yards from
the gate he stopped, the two officers just behind him.
For the moment all that he could think of was that he
wanted to urinate. In the silence he said
haltingly, "Ohayo, watashi wa
Taira-san. Nan desu ka?" Good morning,
I am Mr. Tyrer, what you want please?
  The officer, Uraga, the big
bearlike man who was at the shishi ambush of
Anjo outside the castle, glared at him, then
bowed and held the bow. Tyrer bowed back but not quite
as low--as Andr`e Poncin had advised--and said
again, "Good morning, what you want please?"
  The officer had noted the less than
respectful bow and exploded in a rush of
Japanese that totally swamped Tyrer whose dismay
mushroomed. So did Hiraga's because the officer
was asking for immediate permission to search the Legation and
grounds, and to interview all Japanese there at
once because it was probable shishi assassins and
revolutionaries were amongst them: "like this one,"
he finished angrily, pointing at Joun.
  Tyrer searched for the words. "Wakarimasen.
Dozo, hanashi wo suru noroku." I
don't understand, please to speak slowly.
  "Wakarimasen ka?"--You don't understand?
the officer said with exasperation, then raised his
voice, believing like most people when talking to a
foreigner that loudness made his words clearer and more
understandable, and repeated what he had said, the
guttural language sounding even more threatening, and
ended with, "It won't take much time and please
understand it is for your own protection!"
  "So sorry, not understand. Please you to speak
English or Dutch?"
  "No, of course not. It should be clear to you.
I only want to come in for a little while. Please
open the gates! It's for your protection!
Look, your gates! Here, I will show you!" He
stepped forward, grasped one of the bars and rattled
the gates loudly, everyone inside shifted
nervously, many safety catches came off and
Pallidar ordered loudly, "Safety catches
on! No firing without my order!"
  "I don't know what the hell he's talking
about," Tyrer said, a chill sweat running down his
back. "Except it's obvious he wants us
to open the gates."
  "Well we're not bloody doing that, not to that
armed rabble! Tell him to go away, that this is
British property."
  "This ...." Tyrer thought a moment, then
pointed at the flagstaff and Union Jack,
"this English place ... no to enter. Please
to go!"
  "Go? Are you mad. I have just explained, this
is for your own protection. We have just caught this
dog and we are sure another is here or
hiding near here. OPEN THE GATES!"
  "So sorry, not understand ..." Helplessly
Tyrer looked around as more Japanese words
surrounded him. Then his eyes focused on
Hiraga not far away. "Ukiya, come here,"
he called out in Japanese. "Ukiya!"
  Hiraga's heart almost stopped. Tyrer shouted
at him again. With pretended terror in a stumbling,
grovelling run, Hiraga put his head in the
dirt at Tyrer's feet, his rump towards the
gate, his coolie hat covering most of him.
  "What man say?" Tyrer asked.
  With much feigned shaking, all senses
razor-edged, Hiraga replied softly,
"He's a bad man ... he wants to come
in, to ... to steal your guns."
  "Ah, yes, come in. Why?"
  "He ... he wants to search."
  "No understand. What mean "ser'ch"?"
  "Search. He wants to look at your
house, everywhere."
  "Yes, understand come in. Why?"
  "I told you, to search--"
  "You, gardener," the officer shouted and
Hiraga jerked as anger flowed over him. For the
first time in his life, out there the center of attention,
on his knees in front of a gai-jin, knowing that under
his hat he wore a rough turban, if that was
taken off it would reveal the shaven pate and
topknot of a samurai, he was suddenly sick with
fear.
  "You, gardener," the man shouted again, rattling
the gates, "tell the fool I only want
to search for assassins--shishi assassins!"
  Desperately Hiraga said softly,
"Taira-sama, the samurai wants to come
in, to look at everyone. Tell him you are
leaving, then he can come in."
  "No understand. Ukiya go there!" Tyrer
pointed at the gates. "Say go away, nice
go away!"
  "I cannot. I cannot," Hiraga whispered,
trying to get his mind working and overcome his
nausea.
  "Phillip," Pallidar said, the sweat staining
the back of his uniform. "What the devil's he
trying to tell you?"
  "I don't know."
  Tension soared as the officer battered the gates
again, once more demanding entrance, his men
began to surge forward and grip the bars to assist
him. Goaded into action, Pallidar went closer.
Coldly he saluted. Equally coldly the man
bowed. Then, slowly Pallidar said, "This is
British property. You are ordered to leave in
peace or accept the consequences."
  The officer stared at him blankly then, again, with
words and actions, told him to open the door--and
quickly.
  "Go away!" Without turning his back
Pallidar called out, "Dragoons only!
Prepare volley!"
  Instantly the ten dragoons rushed forward in
unison, formed two ranks just in front of the
gates, in unison the front rank knelt,
all ten safety catches came off, shells
went into the breech and they aimed. In the sudden
silence Pallidar slowly unbuckled his holster.
"Go away!"
  Abruptly the officer laughed and his laugh was
taken up in the square. There were hundreds of
samurai there and he knew thousands were nearby and
tens of thousands within reach. But none of them had seen
the carnage that a few stalwart, disciplined
British soldiers could cause with their fast and
easy-to-fire breech-loaders.
  As quickly as the laughter arose, it died. Both
sides waited for the inevitable first move.
Frantic expectation swept everyone: This'll
be to the death, shi kiraru beki, Christ
Almighty, Namu Amida Butsu ...
  Hiraga sneaked a quick look up at Tyrer,
saw the blank helplessness and cursed, knowing that
any second the officer must order the attack
to save face amidst the rumbling animosity
outside. Before Hiraga could stop himself, his
self-survival mechanism decided to gamble and
he heard himself whisper in English--never once
before had he made any indication to Tyrer he could
speak the language, "P'rease to trust--
p'rease say words: Sencho ... doz--"
  Tyrer gaped. "Eh? Did you say
"trust"? Eh?"
  Committed now, heart thundering and hoping that the two
officers nearby were so concentrated on the outside
they would not overhear him, Hiraga whispered
haltingly, his pronunciation only fair, l's
impossible for him. "P'rease quiet. Danger!
Pre'tnd words yours. Say Sencho, dozo
shizuka ni ... say words!" Sick
with fear he waited then, sensing that samurai tension
outside was at breaking point, hissed in English
again, as an order: "Say-words-now! Now!
Sencho ... dozo shizuka ni ...
quick!"
  Almost out of himself Tyrer obeyed.
"Sencho, dozo shizuka ni ..."
parroting the words exactly and those following, not
knowing what he was saying and endeavoring to put
into perspective that this gardener could speak English
and that this was not a dream. Within seconds he saw that
the words were having an effect. The officer shouted for
quiet. Tension was lessening in the square. Now the
officer listened intently to him, occasionally saying,
"Hai, wakatta"--Yes, I understand.
Tyrer's courage flooded back and he
concentrated on Hiraga and the Japanese. The
words ended quickly with, "Domo."
  At once the officer launched into a reply.
Hiraga waited until it had ended. "Shake
head," he whispered. "Say Iy`e, domo,
bow quick-quick, back house. Order me go too."
  More controlled now, Tyrer firmly shook his
head. "Iy`e, domo!" he said
importantly and in awed silence, the center of the
world, he stomped back towards the house, stopped
in sudden confusion, turned and called out in
English, "Ukiya! come along ... oh
Christ," searched frantically for the Japanese
word, found it and beckoned him: "Ukiya,
isogi!"
  With the same grovelling run Hiraga obeyed.
At the top of the steps so that only Tyrer could
hear, stooping abjectly, his back to all eyes
he said, "P'rease order o'rr men, now safe.
Inside house quick p'rease."
  Obediently Tyrer called out, "Captain
Pallidar, order the men to stand down, it's, er,
it's quite safe now!"
  Once inside the Legation, out of sight,
Tyrer's ashen relief turned to anger. "Who
are you, what the devil did I say, eh?"
  "Exp'rain 'rater, Taira-san.
Samurai want search, you, o'rr men, want
take guns," Hiraga said, stumbling over the
words, not yet recovered from his own fear. He
stood erect now, looking him straight in the
eyes, not as tall but as sweat-stained, knowing he was
not yet out of the trap. "Captain very anger, want
guns, taking guns, want searching for
... for Bakufu enemy. You say him, "No,
Captain, kinjiru, forbidden searching. Today I
and men 'reave here, then you search. Not now,
kinjiru. We keep weapons when 'reave.
Kinjiru forbidden stop us. Thank you. I now
prepare go Yokohama.""
  "That's what I said?"
  "Yes. P'rease now outside again, order
me, gardeners back to work angri'ry. Word
hataraki-mashoi," Hiraga said queasily.
"We speak 'rater, in secret, you me, yes?"
  "Yes, but not alone, with an officer present."
  "Then no speak, so sorry." Hiraga
assumed his grovelling posture and backed out of the
room, the exchange having taken only a few
seconds, and once more dropped to his knees before
Tyrer, rump towards the forecourt.
  Unsettled, Tyrer stepped out into the light.
He saw that everyone was still waiting. "Captain
Pallidar, and, er, Captain McGregor, stand
the men down, then please join me for a conference.
Hataraki-mashoi! Ikimasho! Get
to work! Hurry up!" he shouted at the gardeners
who obeyed at once. Thankfully Hiraga
fled to the safety of the garden muttering to the gardeners
to cover him, officers and sergeants started shouting
orders and the world began again.
  Oblivious of everything, Tyrer stood on the
veranda watching Hiraga, undecided, aghast that
obviously he was a spy at the same time blessing
him for saving them.
  "You wanted us?" Pallidar said, breaking his
revery.
  "Oh! Oh yes ... please follow me."
He led them into his office, closed the door, and
told them what he had said.
  Both congratulated him. "Damned
impressive, Phillip," Pallidar said.
"For a moment I was sure we were going to have a
showdown and Christ knows what would have happened then.
Too many of the buggers really--eventually they would have
overrun us. Eventually. Of course the fleet
would have revenged us but we would have been pushing up
daisies and that's a pretty bloody boring
thought."
  "More than a bit boring," Captain
McGregor muttered then glanced at Tyrer.
"What do you want us to do now, sir?"
  Tyrer hesitated, astonished that neither had
heard Hiraga's English, but pleased
with his newfound stature--it was the first time
McGregor had called him "sir." "We'd
best obey Sir William. Order everyone
to pack up and ... but without making it look like an
ignominious retreat, can't let them have our guns
--what cheek!--or let them think we're running
away. We'll march out with, er, with bands and
pomp."
  "Perfect, after we've ceremoniously run
down the flag."
  "Fine! Well, I'd better ... I'd
better make sure all dispatches are boxed
etc."
  Captain McGregor said, "May I
suggest, sir ... I really think you've earned a
large glass of champagne--I do believe
we've a few bottles left."
  "Thank you." Tyrer beamed. "Perhaps we,
let's Splice the Mainbrace," this was the
traditional naval phrase for issuing a ration of
rum to all hands. "Also we should all have tiffin first
--show them we're not going to be hurried."
  "I'll get it organized right away,"
McGregor said. "Damn clever to think of
getting that gardener to help with the words, some of them
sounded quite English. But why did they want to search
the Legation?"
  "To find ... to search for Bakufu enemies."
  Both men stared at him. "But there aren't any
Jappos here, except gardeners, if that's what
they meant."
  Tyrer's heart surged as this at once pegged
Ukiya but Pallidar was saying, "You're not
really going to allow them to search our Legation, are
you? Surely that would create a dangerous
precedent."
  At once his bonhomie vanished forof course
Pallidar was right. "Damn, didn't think of that
at the time!"
  McGregor broke the silence. "Perhaps, perhaps
before we leave, sir, you could invite the samurai
officer to walk around with us, inspect the Legation,
nothing wrong with inviting him. He can inspect the
gardeners at the same time or we could just send them
off before we all leave and we lock our gates."
  "A perfect compromise," Pallidar said
happily.

       END OF VOLUME III


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume IV of Twelve Volumes
       Pages i-ii and 679-900




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK TWO

                 

    Monday, 13th October: (continued)
  Hiraga was weeding near a side door of the
Legation, an open window nearby, dirty and
sweaty, the late afternoon sun still hot. Baggage
being piled in carts in the forecourt, horses
groomed, some soldiers already drawn up in marching
order. Sentries patrolled the circumference
walls. Outside the walls massed samurai
squatted under sunshades or lolled around,
malevolently.
  "Now!" It was Tyrer's voice from inside the
room. Hiraga made sure he was not observed,
ducked down into the undergrowth and quickly opened the
door. Hastily, Tyrer led the way down the
corridor into a room that overlooked the forecourt
and bolted the door. Curtains over the closed
windows filtered the sunlight. A desk and a few
chairs, rolls of documents, files, and a
revolver on the desk. Tyrer sat behind it and
motioned to a chair. "Please sit down. Now
tell me who are you."
  "First, sek'ret I speak Ingerish, yes?"
Hiraga remained standing, at his full height and
somehow menacing.
  "First tell me who you are and then I will
decide."
  "No, so sorry, Taira-san. I use
to you, a'ready save men. Big use. True,
neh?"
  "Yes, true. Why should I keep this
secret?"
  "Safe me ... you also."
  "Why me?"
  "Perhaps not wise have ... how you say, ah
yes, sek'ret other gai-jin not know. I very
he'rp you. He'rp 'rearn 'ranguage, he'rp
about Nippon. I say you truth, you say me
truth too, you he'rp me I he'rp you. What
age p'rease?"
  "I'm twenty-one."
  Hiraga hid his surprise and smiled from under
the brim of his hat, so hard to tell the age of
gai-jin who all looked alike. As to the gun his
enemy had placed on the table it was laughable. He
could kill this fool with his hands before he could
touch it. Such a simple kill, so tempting, and
this a perfect place, so easy to escape from but,
once outside, not so simple to escape the
samurai. "Keep se'kret?"
  "Who are you? Your name's not Ukiya, is it?"
  "Promise se'kret?"
  Tyrer took a deep breath, weighed the
consequences and came up with disaster on all counts.
"I agree." His heart skipped several beats
as Hiraga slid the blade out of the hat brim,
and cursed himself for being so reckless to put himself at
so much risk. "In for a penny in for a pound," he
muttered.
  "What?"
  "Nothing." He watched Hiraga prick his
finger, then hand him the knife.
  "Now you p'rease." Tyrer hesitated, knowing
what was coming but, having decided, he shrugged and
obeyed. Solemnly Hiraga touched his finger
to Tyrer's, mixing their blood. "I swear
by gods keep sek'ret about you. You say same
p'rease by Christian god, Taira-san."
  "I swear by God to keep it secret about you as
long as I can," Tyrer said gravely, wondering
where the binding oath would take him. "Where did you
learn English? A missionary school?"
  "Hai, but I not Christian." Not safe
to tell about our Choshu schools, Hiraga thought,
or about Mr. Great Smell, the Dutchman, our
Ingerish teacher who said he had been a priest before
becoming a pirate. Truth or lie to this Taira
matters not at all, he is gai-jin, a minor
leader of our most powerful outside enemy and therefore
to be used, distrusted, hated and killed at whim.
"You he'rp es'kape?"
  "Who are you? Where do you come from? Your name's not
Ukiya."
  Hiraga smiled and sat in one of the chairs.
"Ukiya mean gardener, Taira-san.
Fami'ry name Ikeda." He said the lie
easily. "Nakama Ikeda, I who officer
want. I twenty-two year."
  "Why?"
  "Because I and fami'ry, of Choshu, we fight
Bakufu. Bakufu take power from Emperor
an--"
  "You mean the Sh@ogun?"
  Hiraga shook his head. "Sh@ogun is
Bakufu, head of Bakufu. He ..." He
thought a moment, then mimed a puppet on
a string. "Un'erstand?"
  "Puppet?"
  "Yes, puppet."
  Tyrer blinked. "The Sh@ogun's a
puppet?"
  Hiraga nodded, more confident now he was
communicating, having to work hard to remember the
words. "Sh@ogun Nobusada, boy, sixteen
year, Bakufu puppet. He 'rive Yedo.
Emperor 'rive Ky@oto. Now Emperor no
power. More two hundred year, Sh@ogun
Toranaga take power. We fight take power
from Sh@ogun and Bakufu, give back
Emperor."
  Tyrer's mind, aching with so much concentration--hard
to understand this man's speech--instantly realized the
far-reaching implications. "This boy Sh@ogun.
How old please?"
  "Sixteen year Sh@ogun Nobusada.
Bakufu say what do," Hiraga said again,
curbing his irritation, knowing he must be patient.
"Emperor much power but no ..." He searched for the
word, could not find it so explained another way,
"Emperor not 'rike daimyo. Daimyo has
samurai, weapon, many. Emperor no
samurai, no weapon. Can no make Bakufu
obey. Bakufu have armies, Emperor not,
wakatta?"
  "Hai, Nakama, wakatta." A thousand
questions were jostling to be asked and Tyrer knew this
man could be a well to be emptied, but it must be
done cautiously and this was not the place. He saw
the intense concentration on the man's face and
wondered how much of what he said Nakama
actually understood, reminding himself to speak slowly
and as simply as possible. "How many of you fight
against the Bakufu?"
  "Many." Hiraga slapped at a vagrant
mosquito.
  "Hundreds, thousands? What sort of people,
ordinary people, gardeners, workmen, merchants?"
  Hiraga looked at him, bewildered. "They
nothing. On'ry serve samurai. On'ry
samurai fight. On'ry samurai hav
weapon. Kinjiru other have weapons."
  Tyrer blinked again. "You're samurai?"
  More bewilderment. "Samurai fight. I say
fight Bakufu, yes? Nakama samurai!"
Hiraga took off his hat and pulled away the
soiled, sweat-stained cloth that served as
a turban to reveal his characteristic shaven pate and
topknot. Now that Tyrer could see his face
clearly, for the first time without the low-brimmed
coolie hat and the first time he had really looked
at him, he saw the same, hard slanting eyes
of a two-sworder, and the vast difference in bone
structure from villagers. "When Shenso,
captain samurai, see me so, I dead."
  Tyrer nodded, his mind amok.
  "Easy me es'kape. P'rease, give
so'rdier c'rothes."
  Tyrer was finding it hard to keep the excitement,
and dread, off his face, part of him desperate
to flee, the other avaricious to have all this
samurai's knowledge that could, no would, be a major key
to unlock the world of Nippon and his own future
if handled correctly. Just as he was about to blurt
out his agreement he remembered Sir
William's previous admonition and,
thankfully, took time to compose himself.
  "Easy es'kape, yes?" Hiraga repeated
impatiently.
  "Not easy, possible. But risky. First I have
to be convinced to be sure you are worth saving."
Tyrer saw the sudden flash of anger--perhaps it was
anger together with fear, he could not decide. Christ,
samurai! I wish Sir William was here,
I'm out of my depth. "Don't think I can
r--"
  "P'rease," Hiraga said as a
supplicant, knowing that this was his only real chance
to break out of the trap, but thinking, Hurry up and
agree or I shall kill you and try to escape over
the wall. "Nakama swear by gods he'rp
Taira-san."
  "You swear solemnly by your gods you will answer
all my questions truthfully?"
  "Hai," Hiraga said at once, astounded that
Tyrer could be so naive as to ask that question of an
enemy or believe his affirmative answer--
surely he cannot be that stupid? What god or
gods? There are none. "By gods I swear."
  "Wait here. Bolt the door, only open it
to me."
  Tyrer put the revolver in his pocket, went
and found Pallidar and McGregor and took them
aside breathlessly. "I need some help. I've
found out Ukiya is one of the men wanted by the
samurai, it turns out he's a sort of
dissident. I want to disguise him as a
soldier and sneak him back with us."
  Both officers stared at him. Then
McGregor said, "Excuse me, sir, but do you
think that's wise? I mean the Bakufu are the
legal government and if we get caught th--"
  "We won't get caught. We just dress him
up as a Redcoat and put in the middle of
soldiers. Eh, Settry?"
  "Yes, we could do that, Phillip, but if
he's spotted and we're stopped we'll be up the
creek without a paddle."
  "Do you have an alternative suggestion?"
Tyrer said, a nervousness to his voice as his
fear-excitement rose. "I want him smuggled
out. Without his help we would probably all be
dead and he will be extremely useful to us."
  Uneasily the other two men looked at each
other, then at Tyrer. "Sorry, it's too
dangerous," Pallidar said.
  "I-don't-think-so!" Tyrer snapped, head
aching. "I want it done! It's a matter of
extreme importance to Her Majesty's
Government and that's the end to it!"
  McGregor sighed. "Yes sir, very well.
Captain, what about mounting him?"
  "As a dragoon? Ridiculous idea, a
gardener won't be able to ride for God's sake.
Much better let him march, surround him with
sold--"
  "Fifty pounds against a brass farthing, the
bugger can't keep step, he'll be as obvious as
a whore in a Bishop's underpants!"
  Then Tyrer said, "What about if we put him
in uniform, bandage his face and hands and carry him
on a stretcher--pretend he's sick."
  The officers looked at him, then beamed. "Good
oh!"
  "Even better," Pallidar said happily,
"we pretend he has some foul disease,
smallpox--measles--plague!" In unison
they laughed.

  The samurai officer and the guards they had
agreed to allow within the now empty Legation
followed Tyrer, McGregor and four
dragoons throughout the house. Their search was
meticulous, every room, every cupboard, even the
attics. At length he was satisfied. In the
hall were two stretchers, on each a soldier,
both feverish, both bandaged, one
partially, the other, Hiraga, completely--head,
feet, and hands--outside his soaking uniform.
  "Both very sick," Tyrer said in
Japanese, Hiraga having given him the words.
"This soldier has spotted disease."
  The very mention of the words caused the samurai
to blanche and move back a pace--outbreaks of
smallpox were endemic in the cities but never so
bad as in China where hundreds of thousands died.
"This ... this must be reported," the officer
muttered, he and his men covering their mouths as all
believed infection and spread of the disease was caused
by breathing befouled air near a sufferer.
  Tyrer did not understand so he just shrugged.
"Man very sick. Not go near."
  "I am not going near him, you think I am
mad?" The big man went on to the veranda.
"Listen," he said quietly to his men.
"Don't say a word about this to the others in the
square or there may be a panic. Stinking foreign
dogs. Meanwhile keep your eyes open, this
Hiraga is here somewhere."
  They scoured the grounds and outhouses, the full
compliment of Legation staff and soldiers drawn
up in the shade, waiting impatiently to begin the
march down to the wharf and to the waiting boats. At
last satisfied, the officer bowed sourly and
stalked back through the gates, samurai massed
outside, Joun still bound near the front ranks,
the petrified gardeners kneeling in a row, all
hats off and naked. As he approached they cowered
deeper into the dirt.
  "Get up!" he said angrily, disgusted that when
he had ordered them to strip, not one of them had the
shaven pate of a samurai, or any sword
cuts, wounds or other sign of samurai
status, so he had been forced to conclude his prey
was still hiding inside, or had escaped. Now he was
even more angry and stomped in front of Joun.
"To disguise himself, the ronin Hiraga has shaved
his head or allowed his hair to grow like one of those
scum gardeners. Identify him!"
  Joun was on his knees, broken, near death.
He had been beaten and brought back to life and
beaten and brought back again on Anjo's orders.
"Identify this Hiraga!"
  "He's ... he's not, not there." The youth
cried out as the officer's iron hard foot thudded
into his most sensitive parts, then again, the
gardeners shivering and terrified. "He's
not ... not there. ..." Again the merciless blow. In
desperate, helpless agony, beyond himself, Joun
pointed at a youngish man who fell on his knees
screaming his innocence.
  "Shut him up!" the officer shouted. "Take
him before the judge, thence to prison and crucify the
scum, take them all, they are guilty of hiding
him, take them all!"
  They were dragged away shrieking they were
guiltless, the youngish man squealing that he had seen
Hiraga earlier near the house and if they let
him go he would show them but no one paid any attention
and quickly his cries and all their cries were ended,
brutally.
  The officer wiped the sweat off his brow,
satisfied that he had carried out his orders. He
took a sip from a water bottle and spat
to clean his mouth, then drank gratefully.
  Eeee, he thought and shivered. The spotted
disease! A gai-jin disease brought from outside!
Everything rotten comes from outside, gai-jin have
got to be thrown out and kept out for all time.
Angrily he watched the bands forming up,
soldiers strutting, his mind on the shishi he
sought.
  Not possible that that gardener was a famous shishi,
the Hiraga of the fight. Karma that I and my men
arrived too late that day to see him and the others who
escaped. Not karma, God was watching over me.
If I had seen them I could not have pretended
to accept the one Joun pointed out. Where is this
Hiraga? He is hiding somewhere. Please
God, help me.
  Eeee, life is curious. I hate the
gai-jin yet I believe in their Jesus God,
though secretly, like my father and his father and his back
to before Sekigahara. Yes I believe in this
Jesus God, the only thing of value from
outside, and didn't the Jesuit Teacher
Princes say Belief gives us added power and that
when we had a problem to worry it as a dog
worries a bone.
  Hiraga is hiding somewhere. I have searched
carefully. Therefore he has disguised himself. As
what? A tree? What?
  Inside the walls preparations for departure
continued. The flag came down. Bands were playing
now. Horsemen into their saddles. Stretchers into a
tumbril. Gates opening, the mounted soldiers
forming up, led by the gai-jin with the
Japanese name, now passed and going down the
hill and--
  The bandages! The revelation burst in the
officer's mind. There is no plague! Clever,
he thought excitedly, but not clever enough! Now, do
I confront them and bottle them up in one of the
narrow streets? Or do I assign spies
to follow him and peg him to lead me to others?
  I peg him.

                 

    Tuesday, 14th October:
  The engagement party was in full swing under the oil
lamps that lit the crowded main hall of the Club
--the whole building taken over by Malcolm
Struan and bedecked for his party. All
respectable members of the Settlement had been
invited and were present, all officers who could be
spared from the fleet and Army--and outside on the
High Street patrols of both services were
ready to inhibit drunks and undesirables from
Drunk Town.
  Angelique had never looked more striking--
crinoline, Bird of Paradise feather
headdress and dazzling engagement ring. The dance was
a pulsating waltz by Johann Strauss the
Younger, brand-new and just arrived from Vienna
by diplomatic pouch that Andr`e Poncin was playing
with gusto on the piano, ably supported by a
skeleton Marine Band in full dress uniform
for the occasion. Her partner was Settry Pallidar
--his selection to represent the Army had been
greeted with a roar of approval, and total
jealously.
  Victoria Lunkchurch and Mabel Swann
were also dancing, this time partnered by Sir William
and Norbert Greyforth, their dance cards filled the
moment the party was announced. For all their girth
both were good dancers, both wore crinolines though
these could not compare with Angelique's in either richness
or d@ecolletage.
  "Thee's a right rotten skinflint, Barnaby,"
Victoria hissed at her husband. "Mabel and
me're going to have new folderols if it costs thee
thy whole company by God! And we wants
titfers like her's by God!"
  "Wot?"
  "Yes wot! Titfers--hats!"
Angelique's headdress had been the
final coup de grace for both women. "'Tis
war, her against us'n." Even so their popularity
overcame their jealousy, and they twirled with
abandon.
  "Lucky bloody bastard," Marlowe
muttered, eyes only for his rival. His blue
naval uniform jacket glittered with the added gold
braid of an aide-de-camp, white silk
trousers and stockings and black, silver-buckled
shoes.
  "Who?" Tyrer asked, passing by with another
glass of champagne, flushed and excited with the
evening and with his success in spiriting Nakama, the
samurai, out of Yedo and, with Sir William's
approval, into his house as a Japanese
teacher. "Who's a bastard, Marlowe?"
  "Get stuffed--as if you didn't know!"
Marlowe grinned. "Listen, I'm the Navy's
rep, I've got the next one and I'll show the
bugger what's what or die in the attempt."
  "Lucky devil! What is it?"
  "Polka!"
  "Oh my word--did you arrange it?"
  "Good God, no!" The polka, based on a
Bohemian folk dance, was another recent
addition to the dance floors of Europe and all the
rage, though still considered risqu`e. "It's on the
program! Didn't you notice?"
  "No, never did, too much on my mind,"
Tyrer said happily, bursting to tell someone how
clever he had been, and even more that tonight, as soon as
he could, he was heading across the Bridge
to Paradise and into the arms of his beloved--
regretting that he was sworn to secrecy on both
counts. "Dances like a dream, doesn't she?"
  "Hey, young Tyrer ..." It was Dmitri
Syborodin, well oiled and sweating, a tankard
of rum in his fist. "I asked the Band Master
to throw in a cancan. Guy said I was the fifth
to ask."
  "My God, is he going to?" Tyrer asked
appalled. "I saw it performed once in Paris
--you won't believe but the girls didn't wear
any pantaloons at all."
  "I believe it!" Dmitri guffawed. "But
Angel Boobs has 'em on tonight, and not
afraid to show 'em either, by God!"
  "Now look here ..." Marlowe began hotly.
  "Come on, John, he's just joking.
Dmitri, you're impossible! Surely
the Bandmaster wouldn't dare?"
  "Not 'nless Malc gives him the nod."
  They looked across the room. Malcolm
Struan sat with Dr. Hoag, Babcott,
Seratard and several of the Ministers watching the dance
floor, eyes only for Angelique as she
dipped and swayed to the enchanting, daring modern
music that exhilarated all of them. His hand rested
on a heavy cane, the gold signet ring
sparkling as his fingers moved to the beat, dressed in
sleek silk evening clothes, winged collar, cream
cravat and diamond pin, his fine leather boots
from Paris.
  "Pity he's so still so disabled," Tyrer
murmured, genuinely sorry, but blessing his own
luck.
  Struan and Angelique had arrived late.
He walked with extreme difficulty, hunched
over as much as he tried to remain upright, his
weight on the two canes, Angelique
radiantly on his arm. Dr. Hoag was with them,
attentive and ever watchful. There were cheers for him
and more for her and then, gratefully sitting, he had
welcomed them, invited them all to partake of the
feast that had been laid out on tables, "But first,
my friends," he said, "please raise your
glasses, a toast to the most beautiful girl in
the world, Mademoiselle Angelique
Richaud, my bride to be."
  Cheers and more cheers. Liveried Chinese
servants brought iced champagne by the case,
Jamie McFay added a few words of joy and the
party was on. Wines from Bordeaux and
Burgundy, a special Chablis much favored
in Asia, brandies, whiskies--all
exclusive Struan imports--gin, beer from
Hong Kong. Sides of Australian roasted
beef, a few whole lambs, chicken pies,
joints of cold salt pork, hams, Shanghai
potatoes, baked and stuffed with roast salt pork
slivers and butter, as well as puddings and
chocolates, a new Swiss import. After
supper had been cleared away and seven drunks
removed, Andr`e Poncin took his place and the
band began.
  With great formality towards Malcolm, Sir
William begged the first dance. Next was
Seratard, then the other Ministers--except von
Heimrich who was in bed with dysentery--the
Admiral and the General, all of them and
others taking turns with the other two women. After
each dance Angelique would be surrounded by flushed
and beaming faces, and then, fanning herself, she would
make her way back to Malcolm's side,
delightful to everyone yet completely attentive
to him, every time refusing the dance, at length allowing
herself to be persuaded by him: "But, Angelique,
I love to watch you dancing, my darling, you dance
as you do so gracefully."
  Now he was watching her, torn between happiness and
frustration, frantic that he was hobbled.
  "Don't fret, Malcolm," Hoag had
said this evening, wanting to calm him, the simple
act of dressing a nightmare of pain and
awkwardness. "This is the first time you've been up.
It's only a month since the accident, don't
worr--"'
  "Tell me that once more and I'll spit
blood."
  "It's not just the pain that's tearing you apart.
It's the medication, or lack of it, and today's
mail. You got a letter from your mother, didn't you?"'
  "Yes," he had said in total misery and
sat on the edge of the bed, half dressed. "She
... well she's furious, never known her so
angry. She's totally opposed to my engagement,
to my marriage ... if I listened to her,
Angelique is the devil incarnate. She
..." The words stumbled out of him. "She
dismissed my letter, dismissed it and said, here read
it: Have you gone mad? Your father's not dead six
weeks, you're not yet twenty-one, that woman's
after your money and our company, she's the daughter of
an escaped bankrupt, the niece of another
felon, and, God help us, Catholic and
French! Are you out of your mind? You say you love
her? Rubbish! You're bewitched. You will stop this
nonsense. You-will-stop-this-nonsense! She has
bewitched you. Obviously you are in no frame of
mind to run Struan's! You are to return without that
person as soon as Dr. Hoag permits it."
  "When I permit it. Malcolm, will you do as
she says?"'
  "About Angelique, no. None of what she
says is important, none of it! Clearly she
didn't read my letter, doesn't give a fig for
me. What the devil can I do?"'
  Hoag had shrugged. "What you've already
decided: you will be engaged and in due time married.
You are going to get better. You will have
lots of rest, lots of good soups and porridge
and stay off the sleeping draft and painkillers.
For the next two weeks you will stay here, then you will
go back and face the ..." he had smiled
kindly, "the future with confidence."
  "I'm very lucky to have you as a doctor."
  "I'm very lucky to have you as a friend."
  "Did you get a letter from her too?"'
  "Yes." A dry laugh. "I did now that
I think of it."
  "And?"'
  Hoag had rolled his eyes. "Enough said?"'
  "Yes. Thanks."
  Now, watching her dancing, center of a
universal admiration, and lust, breasts in large
part fashionably revealed, slender ankles
enticing eyes to seek further under the billowing
hoops of apricot silk, he felt himself
hardening. Thank God for that, he thought, much of his
rage evaporating, at least that's working, but,
Christ, I know I won't be able to wait until
Christmas. I won't.

  It was nearing midnight now and she sipped
champagne and hid behind her fan, fluttering it in
a practiced manner, teasing those around her, then
gave the glass away as though bestowing a gift,
made her apologies and went gliding back to her
chair that was beside Struan. Close by was an
animated group of Seratard, Sir William,
Hoag, other Ministers, and Poncin. "La,
Monsieur Andr`e, your playing is superb.
Isn't that so, Malcolm darling?"
  "Yes, superb," Struan said, not feeling good
at all, trying to cover it. Hoag glanced over
at him.
  In French she was saying, "Andr`e, where have you
been hiding the last few days?" She looked over
her fan at him. "If we were in Paris I would
swear that you had given your heart to a new
ladyfriend."
  Poncin said lightly, "Just work,
Mademoiselle."
  Then, in English, "Ah, sad. Paris in the
fall is especially wonderful, almost as
breathtaking as spring. Oh, wait till I show
it to you, Malcolm. We should spend a season
there, no?" She was standing close to him, and she
felt his arm go loosely around her waist, she
rested her arm lightly on his shoulder and
toyed with his long hair. The touch pleased her, his
face handsome and clothes handsome and the ring he had
given her this morning, a diamond with other
diamonds surrounding it, delighting her. She
glanced at it, twisting it, admiring it, wondering
how much it was worth. "Ah, Malcolm, you will
enjoy Paris, in season, it's truly
wonderful. Could we?"
  "Why not, if you'd like to."
  She sighed, her fingers discreetly caressing his
neck, and said as though taken by a sudden thought,
"Perhaps, do you think, ch@eri, do you think we could
honeymoon there--we could dance the night away."
  "Your dancing is a delight,
Mademoiselle, in whatever city," Hoag said,
sweating and uncomfortable in his overtight clothes.
"Wish I could say the same for mine. May I
sugg--"
  "You don't dance at all, Doctor?"
  "Years ago, when I was in India I did,
but stopped when my wife died. She really enjoyed
it so much that now I can't enjoy it at all.
Marvelous party, Malcolm. May I suggest
we call it a night?"
  Angelique glanced up at him, her smile
fading, noticed the caution on his face, looked
at Malcolm and saw the exhaustion. How awful
he's so sick, she thought. Damn!
  "It's still early," Malcolm was saying
bravely, longing to lie down, "isn't it,
Angelique?"
  "I must confess I really am tired too,"
she said at once. Her fan closed, she put it
down, smiled at him, Poncin and the others,
preparing to leave. "Perhaps we could slip out and let
the party continue ..."
  They made their quiet apologies to those around
them. Everyone else pretended not to notice them
leave but in her wake was emptiness. Outside at
the door she stopped a moment. "Oh la la, I
forgot my fan. I'll catch you up, my
darling."
  She hurried back. Poncin intercepted her.
"Mademoiselle," he said in French. "I
believe this is yours."
  "Ah, you're so kind." She accepted her
fan, delighted that her stratagem had worked and that
he was as observant as she had hoped. As he
bent over her hand to kiss it she whispered in
French, "I must see you tomorrow."
  "Legation at noon, ask for Seratard, he
won't be there."

  She was brushing her hair in front of her
mirror, still humming the last waltz she had
danced. Which was the best? she asked herself. The best
dance? That's easy, Marlowe and the polka, better
than Pallidar and waltzes--you should waltz
only with the love of your life, allowing the music
to swim your head with adoration and longing, drifting you
on the clouds, tingling and wanting as I am tonight, the
best day of my life, engaged to a fine man and
loved by him to distraction.
  It should be the best day, but isn't.
  Strange that I enjoyed this evening, and can act and
think calmly, when already the day has passed,
I'm overdue so probably with child of a rapist that
must be ended.
  She was watching her reflection as though it was
another person, the brushstrokes firm,
titillating her scalp and head and taking away
any cobwebs, astonished that she was still alive and
outwardly the same after so much agony.
  Curious. Every day after the first has seemed
easier.
  Why is that?
  I don't know. Well, never mind. Tomorrow will
solve the overdue though perhaps even now I shall begin
in the night and there will have been no need for all the
fear and crying and crying and more fear. Tens of
thousands of women have been trapped like I am
trapped and still have been made whole without hurt.
Just a little drink and everything as before and no one the
wiser. Except you and God! Except you and the
doctor, or you and the midwife--or witch.
  Enough for tonight, Angelique. Trust in God and the
Blessed Mother. The Blessed Mother will help you, you are
blameless. You are openly engaged to a marvelous
man, somehow you will be married and live happily
ever after. Tomorrow ... tomorrow will begin the where and how.
  Behind her Ah Soh was tidying the four-poster,
picking up her stockings and underwear. The crinoline
already hung on a rack with two others, and half
a dozen new day dresses still wrapped in their
sheaves of rice paper. Through the open window came
the sound of laughter and drunken singing, and music from
the Club that still showed no sign of abating.
  She sighed, wanting to be back at the dance.
The brush moved more vigorously.
  "Miss'y wan thing, heya?"
  "No. Want to sleep."
  "Ni'te Miss'y."
  Angelique bolted the door after her. The
connecting door to Struan's suite was closed but
unbolted. By custom, as soon as she had finished
her toilet, she would knock, then go and kiss him
good night, perhaps chat just a little and return again,
leaving the door ajar in case he had a seizure
in the night. These were infrequent now, though since
he had stopped the night medicine a week ago,
he was very restless, hardly sleeping, but never
demanding.
  Again she sat at her mirror and was pleased with
what she saw. Her peignoir was silk and lacy
and Parisian--a locally made copy of one she
had brought with her: ... and you cannot believe the
workmanship, Colette, or the speed of the
Chinese tailor, she had written this afternoon for
tomorrow's mail ship.

Now I can get anything copied. Please send
me some patterns, or cuttings from La
Parisienne or L'Haute Couture of the
latest styles or anything wonderful--my
Malcolm is so generous and so rich! He says
I can order what I like!
  And my ring!!!! A diamond with fourteen
smaller ones around it. I asked him how on earth
he had got it and where in Yokohama and he just
smiled. I really must be more careful and not ask
silly questions. Colette everything is so marvelous
except I'm worried about his health. He
improves so slowly and walks very badly. But his
ardor increases, poor man, and I have to take
care ... Must dress for the party now but I'll
write more before the post. My everlasting love for the
moment.

  How lucky Colette is, her pregnancy
a gift of God.
  Stop! No more or the tears and terror will come
back. Put the problem aside. You decided
what to do, if it was or if it was not. It is, so the
other plan--what else can you do?
  An absent touch of perfume behind her ears and
on her breasts, a slight adjustment of the lace.
A gentle knock on his door. "Malcolm?"
  "Come in--I'm alone."
  Unexpectedly, he was not in bed but sitting in
his armchair. Red silk dressing gown,
eyes strange. At once some instinct put her
on guard. She bolted the door as usual, and
went over to him. "Not tired, my love?"
  "No, and yes. You take my breath away."
He held out his hands and she came closer, heart
picking up a beat. His hands were trembling. He
coaxed her nearer and kissed her hands and arms and
breast. For a moment she did not resist, enjoyed his
adoration, wanting him, and leaned down and kissed
him and allowed him to fondle her. Then, the heat
mounting too swiftly, she sank on her knees
beside the chair, heart pounding like his, and half
broke the embrace.
  "We mustn't," she whispered breathlessly ...
  "I know but I must, I want you so much ..."
His lips were throbbing and hot and seeking and, pushed
onwards, hers responded. Now his hand was
caressing her thigh, feeding more fire to her loins, and
then the pleasing tormenter moved higher and higher still and
she wanted more but drove herself from the ever-pressing
brink and again pulled away, whispering, "No,
ch@eri." But this time he was surprisingly
stronger, his other arm held her in an amorous
vise, his voice and lips ever more persuasive,
closer and closer but then, without thinking, he twisted
too quickly and pain ripped through him. "Oh
Christ!"
  "What is it? Are you all right?" she said,
frightened.
  "Yes, yes I think so. Christ
Almighty!" It took him a moment or two
to recover, the surging pain lancing his ardor, that
ache remaining, the other pain making it seem more
strong. His hands still held on to her, still trembling
but without strength. "Jesus, sorry ..."
  "No sorry, my darling." When, thankfully,
she had recovered her own breath, she got up and
poured some of the cold tea that he kept beside the bed,
her loins restless and cramped and nervous, heart
agitated, not wanting to stop either but must, a few more
minutes and wouldn't have, must find a way to be
safe, him safe, us safe--a voice shouting the
litany at the forefront of her mind, "a man
never marries his mistress, nothing before marriage,
everything permissible after," pounded into her as soon
as she could understand.
  "Here," she murmured, giving him the cup.
  She knelt and watched him, eyes closed,
sweat staining his face and dressing gown. In a
moment, most of her own unease and
disquiet slid away. She put a hand on his
knee and he covered it. "Being so, so close is
bad for us, Malcolm," she said softly, liking
him very much, loving him but not truly sure about
love. "It's difficult for both of us,
ch@eri, I want you too and love you too."
  After a long time he said with difficulty, his
voice low and hurting, "Yes but, but you can
help."
  "But we can't, not before we're married, not yet,
we can't, not now."
  Abruptly his pain and frustration crested at
having to sit all evening and endure other men
dancing her, lusting her, while he could hardly
walk where a month ago he knew he was a far
better dancer than any one of them, crested.
  Why not now? he wanted to scream at her, what
difference does a month or two make? For
Christ's sake ... but all right I'll accept
that, that at marriage a proper girl must be
virgin or she's a loose woman, I'll
accept that a gentleman doesn't wrong her before
marriage, I accept that! For the love of God
there are other ways.
  "I know, we, we can't now," he said
throatily, "but ... Angelique, but please
help me, please."
  "But how?"
  Once more words choked him: For Christ's sake
like girls in Houses do, kiss you and fondle you
and finish you--do you think lovemaking is just spreading
your legs and lying there like a piece of meat--the
simple things these girls will do without fuss of
shame and happy for you afterwards, "Hey, you now
all same good-ah, heya?"'
  But he knew he could never tell her. It was
against all his upbringing. How do you explain to the
lady you love when she's so young and artless or so
selfish or just ignorant. Suddenly the truth
became rancid. Something in him mutated,
changed.
  In a different voice he said, "You're quite
right, Angelique, it's difficult for both of
us. Sorry. Perhaps it would be best if you moved
back to the French Legation until we leave for
Hong Kong. Now that I'm getting better we
must guard your reputation."
  She stared at him, unnerved by the change. "But
Malcolm, I am comfortable where I am, and near
in case you need me."
  "Oh yes, I need you." His mouth moved with the
shadow of an ironic smile. "I'll ask
Jamie to make the arrangements."
  She hesitated, off balance, not sure how
to proceed. "If that's what you want,
ch@eri."
  "Yes, it's best. As you said, being so close
is difficult for each of us. Good night, my
love, I'm so glad you enjoyed your party."
  A chill passed through her but whether from outside
or inside she did not know. She kissed him,
ready to return his passion, but there was none. What
had changed him? "Sleep beautifully,
Malcolm, I love you." Still nothing.
  Never mind, she thought, men are so moody and
difficult. Smiling as though nothing was wrong she
unbolted his door, blew him a tender kiss and
went into her own room.
  He watched their door. It was slightly ajar.
As usual. But everything in their world was no longer as
usual. The door and her nearness no longer
tempted him. He was feeling different, somehow
refashioned. He did not know why but he was very
sad, very old, some instinct telling him that however
much he loved her, however much he tried
physically, she would never in their whole life together
ever completely satisfy him.
  Using his stick he heaved himself to his feet and
hobbled as quietly as he could to the bureau. In the
top drawer was the small bottle of the medication that
he had secreted away against nights when the idea
of sleep became impossible. He swigged the
last of it. Heavily, he shuffled to his bed.
Gritting his teeth, he lay down and sighed as
most of the pain left him. That he had consumed the
last of the peace-giver did not bother him in the
least. Chen, Ah Tok or any of the servants
could supply him with more, whenever he wanted. After
all, didn't Struan's supply part of China?
  On her side of the door, Angelique was still
leaning against the wall, in turmoil, unsure
whether to go back or to leave well enough alone. She
had heard him go to the bureau and the drawer open, but
did not know why, heard the bed springs creak and his
long-drawn-out sigh of relief.
  It was just the pain and because we can't, not now, she
thought, reassuring herself again, stifling a nervous
yawn. And also because he had to sit still at the dance
when he is as fine a dancer as I've ever had--
wasn't it that that had first attracted me
to him in Hong Kong from all the others?
  Not wrong that he wants to make love--and not
my fault he was hurt. Poor Malcolm,
he's just overwrought. Tomorrow he will have forgotten all
about it and everything will be fine--and it's better I
move now, there's the other to consider. All will be
well.
  She slipped into bed and into easy sleep but her
dreams were quickly peopled by strange monsters with
twisted baby faces, shrieking with laughter and
tugging at her, "mamma ... mamma," writing
on the sheets with her own blood that leaked from the
tip of her finger she used as pen, tracing and
retracing those characters--the ones from the counterpane
imprinted deeply in her mind that she had not yet
had the courage to ask Andr`e or Tyrer about.
  Something jerked her out of sleep. The
nightscapes vanished. Uneasily awake, she
glanced at the door, half expecting to see him
there. But he was not and she heard, faintly, his
heavy, regular breathing, so she settled back in
her pillows and thought, It was the wind or a banging
shutter.
  Mon Dieu, I'm tired, but what a
lovely time I had at the dance. And what a
lovely ring he gave me.

  Humming the polka and envious of John
Marlowe's success, and quite sure he could have done
as well, Phillip Tyrer half danced up to the
door of the House of the Three Carp in the tiny,
deserted little alleyway and knocked with a flourish.
Here the Yoshiwara seemed to be slumbering, but not
far away the houses and bars on Main Street were
bubbling, the night young with the noise of men laughing and
raucous singing, the occasional twang of samisen and
laughter and pidgin mixed with it.
  The door grill opened. "Mass'r, wat?"
  "Please speak Japanese. I am
Taira-san and I have a appointment."
  "Ah, is that so?" the burly servant said.
"Taira-san, eh? I will inform the
mama-san." The grill closed.
  As he waited Tyrer's fingers drummed on the
old wood. Yesterday and last night he had had
to spend all his time with Sir William,
explaining about Nakama and the Legation, arranging a
modus vivendi for his newfound teacher--guilty
he had not revealed the vital truth that the man could
speak some English. But he had sworn,
and an Englishman's word was his bond.
  Sir William had finally agreed
"Nakama" could be openly samurai--sons of
samurai families had been attached to the
French and British Legations for short periods
in the past, just as Babcott had Japanese
assistants. But Sir William had ordered
he was not to wear or have swords within the Settlement
fence. This same rule applied to all samurai,
except Settlement guards under an officer on
their rare, and prior-sanctioned patrols.
Further that Nakama was not to dress
ostentatiously or go anywhere near the Customs
House or guard house, and to keep out of sight as
much as possible, that if he was discovered and claimed
by the Bakufu it would be his fault and he would be
handed over to them.
  Tyrer had sent for Nakama and explained what
Sir William had agreed. By this time he was
too tired for Fujiko. "Now, Nakama, I
need to send a message, and I want you
to deliver it. Please write the characters for:
"Please arrange ...""
  "'range, p'rease?"'
  "To fix or to make. "Please make an
appointment for me tomorrow night with ..." leave a
blank for the name."
  It had taken Hiraga a little time to understand
exactly what was required of him and why. In
desperation, Tyrer had found himself giving the name
Fujiko and the House of the Three Carp. "Ah,
Three Carp?"' Hiraga had said. "So
ka! Give message mama-san, no
mistake, arrange you see musume tomorrow,
yes?"'
  "Yes, please."
  Nakama had shown him how to write the characters and
Tyrer copied them, very pleased with himself and signed
the message carefully with the signature Hiraga
had developed for him and now he was here at the
gate.
  "Come on, hurry up," he muttered, ready
willing and able.
  In time the door grill opened again.
By Raiko. "Ah, good evening, Taira-san,
you want us to speak Japanese, certainly,"
she said with a smile and a little bow and followed with a
flood of lilting Japanese which he did not
catch, except the name of Fujiko several times,
ended with, "So sorry."
  "What? Oh, You sorry? Why sorry,
Raiko-san? Good evening, I have appointment
Fujiko ... with Fujiko."
  "Ah so sorry," she repeated
patiently, "but Fujiko is not available this
evening, and will not be free even for a short time. So
sorry but there is nothing I can do, she sends her
regrets of course and, so sorry, but all my
other ladies are equally occupied. Very
sorry."
  Again he did not understand everything. The gist reached
him. Crestfallen, Tyrer understood that Fujiko
was not there, but not the reason. "But letter, yesterday
--my message man, Nakama, he bring,
yes?"
  "Oh yes! Nakama-san brought it and as
I told him I thought everything would be perfect but,
so sorry, it is not now possible to accommodate
you. So sorry, Taira-san, thank you for
remembering us. Good night."
  "Wait," Tyrer shouted in English as the
grill began to close, then pleading, "you said she
isn't there--here, yes? Wait, please,
Raiko-san. Tomorrow--sorry--tomorrow, Fujiko,
yes?"
  Sadly Raiko shook her head. "Ah so
sorry, tomorrow is not possible either, it really
distresses me to have to say so. I do hope you do
understand, so sorry."
  Tyrer was aghast. "No tomorrow? Next day,
yes?"
  She hesitated, smiled, made another little
bow: "Perhaps, Taira-san, perhaps but, so
sorry I can promise nothing. Please ask
Nakama-san to come here during the day and I will
tell him. You understand? Send Nakama-san.
Good night."
  Blankly Tyrer stared at the door, cursed
bitterly, bunched his fists, wanting to smash
something. It took him a moment to recover from his
immense disappointment, then, despondently, he
turned away.

  Hiraga had been watching through a spy hole in
the fence. When Tyrer vanished around the corner he
went back along the meandering stone path through the
garden, deep in thought. The garden was
deceptively spacious with small bungalows,
always with verandas, nestling in their own shrubbery.
  But he avoided all of them, went
into the shrubbery and knocked on a panel of fence.
It swung open noiselessly. The servant bowed
and he nodded and went along a path, heading for a
similar dwelling. Most Inns or Houses had
secret exits and hiding places, or connections
with the one next door, and those that dared to cater
to shishi paid special attention to security--for their
own safety. This part of the House of the Three
Carp was for very special guests with different
cooking facilities, maids but the same
courtesans. On the veranda he kicked off his
geta--clogs--slid back the shoji. "What
did he do?" Ori asked.
  "Meekly walked away. Weird."
Hiraga shook his head in wonder and sat
opposite him, nodded a brief acknowledgment of
Fujiko's deep bow. Yesterday, after delivering
Tyrer's letter--with Raiko's amused compliance he
had hired Fujiko for tonight.
  "May I ask why, Hiraga-san?"'
Raiko had said.
  "Just to annoy Taira."
  "Eeee, I think he left his virginity
here, with Ako. Then he tried Meiko, then
Fujiko. Fujiko made his eyes cross."
  He had laughed with Raiko, liking her, but when
he saw Fujiko he was bewildered that his enemy
found the girl attractive. She was ordinary,
hair ordinary, everything about her ordinary except
her eyes that were unfashionably large. Nonetheless
he hid his opinion and had complimented Raiko that
she had acquired such a flower, who looked
sixteen though she was thirty-one and fifteen years
a courtesan.
  "Thank you, Hiraga-san." Raiko had
smiled. "Yes she's an asset, for some
reason gai-jin like her. But please, don't
forget the Taira is our client and that gai-jin
are not like us. They tend to attach themselves to one lady
only. Please encourage him, gai-jin are
rich, and I hear he's an important
official and may be here for some years."
  "Sonno-joi."
  "That is for you to arrange. You take their
heads, but promise me not here, meanwhile I
take their wealth."
  "You will permit Ori to stay?"'
  "Ori-san is a curious youth," she had
said hesitantly, "very strong, very angry, very
unsettled--a tinderbox. I'm
afraid of him. I can hide him for a day or two
but ... but please, curb him while he's my
guest? There is trouble enough in the Willow World without
seeking it."
  "Yes. Have you any news of my cousin,
Akimoto?"'
  "He's safe at Hodogaya, Teahouse
of the First Moon."
  "Send for him." Hiraga had slid a
gold oban from his secret pocket. He noted
how her eyes glinted. "This will pay for any
messenger, or expenses while Akimoto and
Ori are here, and for Fujiko's services tomorrow of
course."
  "Of course." The coin, quite a generous
payment, vanished into her sleeve. "Ori-san
may stay until I think it is time for him
to move on, so sorry, then he leaves, you
agree?"'
  "Yes."
  "Next, so sorry, shishi, but I must tell
you it is very dangerous for you here. This is being sent
to every barrier." Raiko unfolded a woodcut
poster, a portrait, about a foot square. Of
him. The caption read: The Bakufu offers
Two Koku reward for the head of this murdering
Choshu ronin who goes under many aliases, one of
which is Hiraga.
  "Baka!" Hiraga said through his teeth.
"Does it look like me? How is it possible?
I've never had a portrait painted."
  "Yes and no. Artists have long memories,
Hiraga-san. One of the samurai at the fight
perhaps? Unless someone closer to you is the betrayer.
Bad also is that important people are seeking you.
Anjo of course, but now Toranaga Yoshi."
  He was chilled, wondering if the courtesan
Koiko was betrayed or was the betrayer. "Why
him?"'
  Raiko shrugged. "He's the head of the
snake, like it or not. Sonno-joi,
Hiraga-san, but do not lead the Bakufu enemy
here, I want my head on my shoulders."
  All night Hiraga had worried about the
poster and what to do about it. He accepted a
refill of sak`e from Fujiko. "This Taira
amazes me, Ori."
  "Why waste time on him? Kill him."
  "Later, not now. Watching him and them, testing,
trying to guess their reactions is like a
game of chess where the rules keep changing
constantly, it is fascinating--once you get over
their stench."
  "Tonight we should have done what I wanted to do:
kill him and dump his body near the guard house
and let them be blamed." Irritably Ori ran
his right hand over the stubble already covering his shaven
pate and face, his left shoulder bandaged and arm still
in a sling. "Tomorrow I'll be shaved clean again and
feel more like a samurai again--Raiko has a
barber she can trust, but clean or not, Hiraga,
this forced laziness is sending me mad."
  "And your shoulder?"
  "The wound's clean. It itches but it's a good
itch." Ori lifted his arm about halfway.
"Can't go further but I force it a little every day. It
would be difficult to use in a fight. Karma. But
that gai-jin Taira, if we had killed him, there
would have been no risk to us or the House, you said
he was so secretive he wouldn't have told anyone
he was here."
  "Yes, but he might have, and that's what I do not
understand. They are unpredictable. They keep
changing their minds, they say one thing and then do the
exact opposite but not with calculation, not like we
do, not like us."
  "Sonno-joi! Killing him would have driven the
gai-jin mad. We should do it the next time he
comes here."
  "Yes, we will but later--he's too valuable
for the moment. He will reveal their secrets, how
to humble them, kill them by the hundreds or thousands
--after we have used them to humble and break the
Bakufu." Hiraga held out the cup again.
Instantly Fujiko filled it, smiling at him.
"I was even in the office of the Leader of all the
Ing'erish, within five paces of him. I'm in the
center of gai-jin authority! If only I could
speak their language better." He was much too
cautious to reveal to Ori the true extent of his
knowledge, or how he had persuaded Tyrer to smuggle
him out--let alone in front of this girl.
  As she replenished their cups through the evening,
smiling, totally attentive, never interrupting,
she listened avidly though appearing not to, wanting
to ask a hundred questions but much too well trained
to do so. "Just listen, smile and pretend to be
dull-witted, only a toy," mama-sans
drilled into all of them, "and soon they will tell
you all you want to know without prompting.
Listen and smile and watch and flatter and make
them happy, only then are they generous. Never
forget happy equals gold which is your only
purpose and only security."
  "In Yedo," Hiraga was saying, "this
Taira was really quite brave, tonight a coward.
Fujiko, what is he like in bed?"
  Smiling, she hid her surprise that anyone
could be so indelicate. "Like any young man,
Hiraga-san."
  "Of course but what is he like? Is he in
proportion--tall man, tall spear?"
  "Ah, so sorry," she dropped her eyes, and
made her voice humble, "but Ladies of the
Willow World are directed never to discuss a
client with another whoever he is."
  "Our rules apply to gai-jin? Eh?"
Hiraga asked.
  Ori chuckled. "You will get nothing out of her,
or any of them, I tried. Raiko-san came
and scolded me for asking! "Gai-jin or not, the
ancient Yoshiwara rule applies," she said.
"We can talk generalizations, but any client
particularly--Baka-neh!" She was really quite
angry."
  The two men laughed but Fujiko saw
Hiraga's eyes were not laughing. Pretending not
to notice, anxious to appease him and at the same
time wondering how she would have to service him tonight, she
said, "So sorry, Hiraga-san, but my
experience is little, with young or old or in the
middle. But most, experienced ladies say
size does not guarantee satisfaction for him
or for her, but that young men are always the best and most
satisfying clients."
  She laughed to herself at the well-worn lie.
I would like to tell you the truth for once: that you young
men are the worst clients, the most demanding, the
least satisfying. You're all hopelessly
impatient, you've plenty of vigor, require
many entries, you've puddles of essence but little
contentment afterwards--and rarely generous. Worst of
all, however much a girl tries not to, she can
become enamored with one particular young man and that
leads to even more misery, disaster and most times
suicide. Old is twenty times better.
  "Some youths," she said, answering without
answering, "are incredibly shy, however well
endowed."
  "Interesting. Ori, I still can't
believe this Taira just meekly turned away."
  Ori shrugged. "Meek or not, he should be dead
tonight and I would sleep better. What else could
he do?"
  "Everything. He should have kicked the door down--
an appointment is an appointment and Raiko not
having a substitute ready was a further
insult."
  "The door and fence are too strong, even for
us."
  "Then he should have gone into the main street and got
five or ten or twenty of his people and brought them
back and smashed the fence down--he is an
important official, the officers and all
soldiers obeyed him at the Legation. That would
certainly have made Raiko kowtow for a year or more
and guaranteed he would have the service he wanted
when he wanted--we might have had to run off too.
That is what I would have done if I was an
important official like him." Hiraga smiled
and Fujiko suppressed a shiver. "It's a
matter of face. Yet they understand face very
well. They would have defended their stupid Legation
to the last man, then the fleet would have laid waste
Yedo."
  "Isn't that what we want?"
  "Yes." Hiraga laughed. "But not when you are
weaponless and grovelling like a gardener--I really
felt naked!" Again a refill. Hiraga
looked at her. Ordinarily, even though the girl
of the evening was not particularly attractive, his
normal virility and the sak`e would arouse him.
Tonight was different. This was the gai-jin Yoshiwara,
she had bedded them so was tainted. Perhaps Ori would
like her, he thought, and smiled back at her for
face. "Order some food, eh, Fujiko? The
best the house can provide."
  "At once, Hiraga-san." She hurried
away.
  "Listen, Ori," Hiraga whispered so no
one could overhear. "There's great danger here."
He took out the folded poster.
  Ori was shocked. "Two koku? That will tempt
anyone. It could be you, not exactly, but a
Barrier guard might stop you."
  "Raiko said the same."
  Ori looked up at him. "Joun was an
artist, a good one."
  "I'd thought of that, and I've been wondering how
they caught him and broke him. He knows
many shishi secrets, knows Katsumata's
planning to intercept the Sh@ogun."
  "Disgusting, allowing himself to be caught alive.
It is obvious we have been infiltrated." Ori
handed the picture back. "Two koku would
tempt anyone, even the most zealous
mama-san."
  "I thought of that too."
  "Grow a beard, Hiraga, or mustache, that
would help."
  "Yes, that would help." Hiraga was glad that
Ori was back in his head again, his counsel always
valuable. "A strange feeling to know that this is out
there."
  Ori broke the silence. "In a day or
two, soon as I can, I am stronger every day, I
will go to Ky@oto and join Katsumata to warn him
about Joun. He should be warned."
  "Yes, good idea, very good."
  "What about you?"
  "I am safe amongst the gai-jin, safer there
than anywhere--so long as I'm not betrayed.
Akimoto's at Hodogaya, I have sent for
him, then we can decide."
  "Good. You will be safer to try for Ky@oto at
once, before these pictures are sent throughout the
Tokaid@o."
  "No. Taira is too good an opportunity
to miss. I will cache swords there in case."
  "Get a revolver, less obvious." Ori
put his right hand inside his yokata, moving it
away from his shoulder, and scratched the bandage.
  Hiraga was shocked to see the little gold cross
on the thin gold chain around his neck. "Why wear
that?"
  Ori shrugged. "It amuses me."
  "Get rid of it, Ori--it ties you to the
Tokaid@o killing, Shorin and her. The cross
is an unnecessary danger."
  "Many samurai are Christian."
  "Yes but she could identify that cross. It is
insane to take such a risk. If you want to wear
one get another."
  After a pause Ori said, "This one amuses
me."
  Hiraga saw the inflexibility, cursed him
inwardly but decided it was his duty to protect the
shishi movement, protect sonno-joi and now was
the time. "Take-it-off!"
  The blood soared into Ori's face.
His half smile did not change but he knew he
was called. His choice was simple: refuse and
die, or obey.
  A mosquito buzzed around his face. He
disregarded it, not wanting to make a sudden
movement. Slowly his right hand pulled the chain
away from his neck, breaking it. The cross and chain
vanished into his sleeve pocket. Then he
placed both hands on the tatami and bowed low.
"You are right, Hiraga-san, it was an unnecessary
danger. Please accept my apologies."
  Silently Hiraga bowed back. Only then
did he relax and Ori straighten. Both men
knew their relationship had changed. Permanently.
They had not become enemies, just were no longer
friends, allies always, but never friends again. Ever. As
Ori picked up his cup and raised it, toasting
him, he was pleased to find his inner rage so
controlled that his fingers did not shake. "Thank
you."
  Hiraga drank with him, leaned over and poured
for both of them. "Now Sumomo. Please tell
me about her."
  "I remember almost nothing." Ori opened his
fan and wafted the mosquito away. "The
mama-san Noriko told me Sumomo arrived
like a spirit with me on a stretcher, told her almost
nothing except that a gai-jin doctor had cut
me open and sewed me up again. She paid half
Shorin's debts and persuaded her to hide me.
During the waiting Sumomo spoke hardly at
all after asking about Shorin, what had happened
to him. When the messenger returned from Yedo with your
message she left for Shimonoseki at once.
The only news she gave was that Satsuma is
mobilizing for war, and your Choshu batteries had
again fired on the gai-jin ships in the Straits,
turning them back."
  "Good. You told her everything about Shorin?"
  "Yes. She asked me seriously and then, after
I told her she said she would be revenged."
  "Did she leave any message or letter with the
mama-san?"
  Ori shrugged. "She left nothing with me."
  Perhaps Noriko has one, Hiraga thought.
Never mind, that can wait. "She looked well?"
  "Yes. I owe her my life."
  "Yes. One day she will want to collect that
debt."
  "Repaying her I repay you and
honor sonno-joi."
  They sat in silence, each wondering what the
other was thinking, really thinking.
  Hiraga smiled suddenly. "Tonight in the
Settlement there was a big celebration, vile
music and much drinking, it's their custom when a
man agrees to marry." He quaffed his cup.
"This sak`e is good. One of the merchants--the
gai-jin you cut at the Tokaid@o--is going
to marry that woman."
  Ori was dumbfounded. "The woman of the
Cross? She's here?"
  "I saw her tonight."
  "So!" Ori muttered as though to himself, then
finished his sak`e and poured for both of them. A little
wine spilled unnoticed on the tray. "She's
to be married? When?"
  Hiraga shrugged. "I don't know. I saw
him and her together tonight, he walks with two canes like
a cripple--your blow wounded him severely,
Ori."
  "Good. And the, the woman what was she like?"
  Hiraga laughed. "Outlandish, Ori, total
buffoonery." He described her crinoline. And
her hairstyle. And got up and parodied her
gait. Soon both men were almost rolling on the
tatamis with laughter. "... breasts out to here,
depraved! Just before I came here I peered in a
window. Men clutched her openly, she and a man
clutched each other, twirling in a sort of dance
in front of everyone to these horrid-sounding
instruments, you couldn't call it music! kicking
up her skirts so you could see halfway up, and
frilly white pants to the ankles. I would never
have believed it if I hadn't seen it for myself but
she went from man to man like a one-sen whore and they
all cheered her. The fool who's going to marry
her, he just sat in a chair and beamed, imagine
that!" He poured but the bottle was empty.
"Sak`e!"
  At once the door opened, a maid came in
on her knees with two new flasks, poured and
scuttled away. He belched, the sak`e getting
to him. "They acted like beasts. Without their cannon
and ships they are beyond contempt."
  Ori glanced out of the window, towards the sea.
  "What is it?" Hiraga was suddenly on
guard. "Danger?"
  "No, no it was nothing."
  Hiraga frowned uneasily,
remembering how sensitive Ori was to outside
emanations. "Do you have swords here?"
  "Yes. Raiko guards them for me."
  "I hate not having swords in my belt."
  "Yes."
  For a time they drank in silence and then the food
arrived, small dishes of broiled fish, rice,
sushi and sashimi, and a Portuguese dish
called tempura--fish and vegetables dipped in
rice flour and deep fried. Before the
Portuguese arrived about A.d. 1550, the
first Europeans to appear off their shores,
Japanese did not know the frying technique.
  When they were replete, they sent for Raiko and
complimented her, refused the entertainment services
of a geisha, so she bowed and left them. "You can go,
Fujiko. Tomorrow, I will be here sometime after
sunset."
  "Yes, Hiraga-san." Fujiko bowed very
low, content to be dismissed without further work as
Raiko had already told her her fee was generous.
"Thank you for honoring me."
  "Of course nothing that you hear or see will ever be
mentioned to the Taira or any gai-jin or
anyone."
  Her head jerked up shock. "Of course not,
Hiraga-sama." When she saw his eyes her
heart lurched. "Of course not," she repeated,
her voice barely audible, bowed her forehead to the
tatami and, deeply frightened, left them.
  "Ori, we take a risk with that woman,
listening."
  "With any of them. But she would never dare, nor
the others." Ori used his fan against the night
insects. "Before we leave we will agree a
price with Raiko to see Fujiko is placed in
a low-grade house where she will be too busy
to make mischief and be well away from all
gai-jin, and Bakufu."
  "Good. That is good advice. It may be
expensive, Raiko said Fujiko is
extremely popular with gai-jin for some reason."
  "Fujiko?"
  "Yes. Strange, neh? Raiko says their
ways are so different from us." Hiraga saw
Ori's smile twist. "What?"
  "Nothing. We can talk more tomorrow."
  Hiraga nodded, drained the last cup then got
up, stripped off the starched yukata that all
Houses and Inns habitually supplied
their clients, and dressed again in the most ordinary
kimono of a villager, rough turban and coolie
straw hat, then shouldered the empty delivery
basket.
  "Are you safe like that?"
  "Yes, so long as I do not have to uncover, and
I've these." Hiraga showed the two passes
Tyrer had given him, one for Japanese, one for
English. "Guards on the gate and at the
bridge are alert, and soldiers patrol the
Settlement at night. There's no curfew but
Taira warned me to be careful."
  Thoughtfully Ori handed the passes back.
  He tucked them in his sleeve. "Good night,
Ori."
  "Yes, good night, Hiraga-san." Ori
looked up at him strangely. "I would like to know
where the woman lives."
  Hiraga's eyes narrowed. "So?"
  "Yes. I would like to know where. Exactly."
  "I can find out, probably. And then?"
  The silence concentrated. Ori was thinking, I'm
not sure tonight, I wish I was, but every time I
let my mind free I remember that night and
my never-ending surge within her. If I had
killed her then that would have ended it, but knowing she's
alive I'm haunted. She haunts me. It's
stupid, stupid but I'm bewitched. She's
evil, disgusting, I know it, but still I'm bewitched
and I'm sure that as long as she's alive she will
always haunt me.
  "And then?" Hiraga said again.
  Ori had kept all his thoughts off his face.
He looked back at him levelly and shrugged.

                 

    Wednesday, 15th October:
  Andr`e Poncin blinked. "You're
pregnant?"
  "Yes," she said softly. "You see th--"
  "That's wonderful, that makes everything
perfect!" he burst out, his shock turning into a
huge beam, because Struan, the British
gentleman, had wronged an innocent lady, and
now could not avoid an early marriage and remain
a gentleman. "Madam, may I congratulate
y--"
  "Hush, Andr`e, no you can't and not so loud,
walls have ears, particularly Legations,
no?" she whispered, feeling out of herself, astounded that
her voice remained so calm and she felt so
calm and could tell him so easily. "You see,
unfortunately, the father is not Monsieur
Struan."
  His smile vanished and then came back.
"You're joking of course, but why the jo--"
  "Just listen, please." Angelique moved her
chair closer to him. "I was raped in Kanagawa
..."
  He stared at her, dumbfounded, as she told
him what she thought had happened to her, what she had
decided to do, how she had hidden the horror ever
since.
  "My God, poor Angelique, poor thing,
how terrible for you," was all he managed to mutter,
deeply shocked, while another piece of the
puzzle fell into place. Sir William,
Seratard and Struan had decided to restrict
news about Dr. Hoag's operation at
Kanagawa to as few people as possible--keeping it
particularly from Angelique, both doctors
advising that to be medically wise. "Why
agitate her unnecessarily? She's upset enough
about the Tokaid@o affair."
  No reason yet to tell her, Andr`e thought
uneasily, the irony rocking him.
  He took her hand and caressed it, forcing himself
to push away his own worries and concentrate on
her. Seeing her there, sitting beside him in his
office, so serene and demure, clear eyes and
picture of innocence, only a few hours ago
the belle of the best ball Yokohama had ever
had, gave her story an air of total
unreality. "This really happened? Really?"
  She raised her hand as though taking an oath.
"I swear it, by God." Now her hands were folded
in her lap. Pale yellow hooped day dress,
tiny orange bonnet and umbrella.
  Bewildered, he shook his head. "Seems
impossible."
  Throughout his adult years he had been part of many
such man-woman tragedies: put into some by his
superiors, stumbling into a few, precipitating
many, and using most if not all for the betterment of his
Cause: for France--the Revolution, Libert`e
Fraternit`e Egalit`e, or Emperor
Louis Napoleon, whoever or whatever the
current vogue--and for himself, first.
  Why not? he thought. What has France
done for me, what will she do for me? Nothing. But this
Angelique, she's either going to fall apart any
moment--her serenity's unreal--or she's like some
women I've known, born bad who twist truth
brilliantly for their own purposes, or like some
who have been pushed over the brink by terror to become
a calculating, cold-blooded woman beyond her
years. "What?"
  "I need to remove the problem, Andr`e."
  "You mean abortion? You're Catholic!"
  "So are you. This is a matter between me and
God."
  "What about confession? You have to be confessed. This
Sunday you must go an--"
  "That is a matter between me and a priest, and then
God. The problem must be removed first."
  "That is against God's law and man's law."
  "And has been done throughout the centuries since
before the Flood." An edge crept into her
voice. "Do you confess everything? Adultery is
also against "God's law," isn't it?
Killing's against all law too. Isn't it?"
  "Who says I've killed anyone?"
  "No one, but it's more than likely you have or
caused deaths. These are violent times. Andr`e,
I need your help."
  "You risk eternal damnation."
  Yes, I've agonized over that with lakes of
tears, she thought grimly, keeping her eyes
innocent, hating him and that she had to trust him.
  This morning she had awakened early and lay there
thinking, reconsidering her plan, and came
to realize of a sudden that she should hate all men.
Men cause all our problems, fathers, husbands,
brothers, sons, and priests--priests the worst
of all men, lots of them notorious fornicators
and deviates, liars, who use the Church for their
own rotten purposes, though it is true a few
are saints. Priests and other men control our world
and ruin it for women. I hate them all--except
Malcolm. I don't hate him, not yet. I
don't know if I truly love him, I don't
know what love is, but I like him more than any
man I've ever known, and I understand him.
  As to the rest, thank God my eyes are open
at last! She was looking at Andr`e, trustful and
begging. Damn you that I have to put my life in
thrall to you, but thank God I see through you now.
Malcolm and Jamie are right, all you want is
to dominate Struan's or cause its
downfall. Damnation that I have to trust any man.
If only I was in Paris, or even Hong
Kong, there are dozens of women I could
discreetly ask for the necessary help but none here. Those
two hags? Impossible! They clearly hate
me and are enemy.
  She allowed a few tears to appear. "Please
help me."
  He sighed. "I will talk to Babcott this
morn--"
  "Are you mad? Of course we dare not involve
him. Or Hoag. No, Andr`e, I've thought it
all out very carefully. Neither of them. We must find
someone else. A madam."
  He gaped at her again, stunned by the calm
voice and logic. "You mean a mama-san?" he
stuttered.
  "What's that?"
  "Oh ... that's the woman, the Japanese
woman who, who runs the local whorehouses,
contracts for the services of the girls, arranges
prices, allocates girls. And so on."
  Her brow creased. "I hadn't thought of one of
them. I did hear there's a house down the
road."
  "My God! You mean Naughty Nellie's
... in Drunk Town? I wouldn't go there for a
thousand louis."
  "But isn't the house run by Mrs.
Fortheringill's sister? The famous Mrs.
Fortheringill of Hong Kong?"
  "How'd you know about her?"
  "Oh my God, Andr`e, am I a foolish
and bigoted English?" she said testily. "Every
European female in Hong Kong knows about
Mrs. Fortheringill's Establishment for Young
Ladies though they pretend not to and never talk
openly about it, or that all but the most stupid know
their men visit Chinese Houses, or have
Oriental mistresses. Such hypocrisy.
Even you would be astonished to know what ladies
discuss in the privacy of their boudoirs, or when
there are no men around. In Hong Kong I heard
her sister opened the house here."
  "It's not the same, Angelique, it caters
for seamen, drunks, remittance men--the dregs.
Naughty Nellie isn't her sister, she just
claims to be, probably just pays some squeeze
for the use of the name."
  "Oh! Then where do you go? "For
entertainment"?"
  "The Yoshiwara," he said and explained,
astounded with this conversation and that he, too, could be so
open.
  "Do you have a special place, a special
House? One where you're on good terms with the
mama-san?"
  "Yes."
  "Excellent. Go to your mama-san tonight and get
whatever drink they use."
  "What?"
  "My God, Andr`e, be sensible, be serious!
This is serious and unless we can solve the problem
I will never be chatelaine of the Noble House, so will
never be able to assist ... certain interests." She
saw that this hit the mark and was further pleased with
herself. "Go there tonight and ask her for it. Don't
ask your girl or a girl for it, they probably
won't know. Ask the patronne, the
mama-san. You can say that "the girl" is
overdue."
  "I don't know if they have such a medicine."
  She smiled benignly. "Don't be silly,
Andr`e, of course they have, they must have." Her right
hand began straightening the fingers of her left-hand
glove. "Once this problem is out of the way,
everything will be wonderful, we'll be married at
Christmas. By the way I decided it would be
better to move out of the Struan suite until
we're married--now that Monsieur Struan is
gaining strength every day. I'll be moving back to the
Legation this afternoon."
  "Is that wise? Better to stay close to him."
  "Normally yes. Except there are
proprieties, but more important, I'm sure
the medicine will not make me feel pleasant for a
day or two. As soon as that's over I'll
decide if I should go back. I know I can
rely on you, my friend." She stood up. "The
same time tomorrow?"
  "If I've nothing I'll send word to let you
know."
  "No. Better we meet here at noon. I
know I can rely on you." She smiled her nicest
smile.
  He tingled, both because of the smile and because,
whatever happened now, she was chained to him forever.
"Those characters," he said, "the ones written on the
sheet, do you remember them?"
  "Yes," she said, surprised by the
non sequitur. "Why?"
  "Could you draw them for me? I might
recognize them, they might have a meaning."
  "They were on the counterpane, not the sheet. In,
in his blood." She took a deep breath and
reached over and took the pen and dipped it in the ink.
"One thing I forgot to tell you. When I woke
up, the little cross I'd worn since a child had
vanished. I searched everywhere but it had gone."
  "He stole it?"
  "I presume so. But nothing else. There was
some jewelry but that was not touched. The pieces were not
too valuable but worth more than the cross."
  The thought of her lying there in that bed, inert, the
nightdress slit from neck to hem, the rapist's
hand pulling away the chain, moonlight glinting on
the cross, before or after, spreading her, rapidly
became real and erotic and throbbed him. His eyes
flowed over her and she bent over the desk,
oblivious of his lust.
  "There," she said and handed him the paper.
  He stared at it, the sunlight glinting on the
gold signet ring he always wore. The characters did
not relate in any way to anything. "Sorry, they
mean nothing, don't even look Chinese--
Chinese or Japanese the writing's the same."
At a sudden thought he inverted the paper and
gasped. "Tokaid@o--that's what they mean!" The
color went out of her face. "You just copied them
upside down. Tokaid@o ties everything together!
He wanted you to know, wanted the whole
Settlement to know and we would have, if you'd told
anyone what had happened! But why?"
  Shakily her fingers went to her temples.
"I, I don't know. Perhaps ... I don't
know. He, he must be dead by now, Monsieur
Struan shot him, surely he must be dead."
  Andr`e hesitated uneasily, weighing the
reasons for and against. "Since we share so many
secrets, and clearly you know how to keep one,
sorry but now another is necessary." He told her
about Hoag and the operation. "It wasn't Hoag's
fault, he had no way of knowing. It's
ironic, both doctors advised against telling
you, to save you anguish."
  "It's because of Babcott and his opiate I am
where I am," she muttered, her voice chilling
him. "The man's alive then?"
  "We don't know. Hoag didn't give him
much of a chance. Why would that devil want
his evil known, Angelique?"
  "Are there any other secrets about this horror
that you know and I don't?"
  "No. Why should he want everyone to know?
Bravado?"
  For a long time she stood staring at what she had
drawn. Motionless except for her breast that rose
and fell with the regularity of her breathing. Then,
without another word she walked out. The door closed
quietly.
  He shook his head in wonder, stared back at
the paper.

  Tyrer was in the small bungalow adjoining the
British Legation that he shared with Babcott,
practicing calligraphy with Nakama, the name
by which he knew Hiraga. "Please give me the
Japanese for: today, tomorrow, the day after, next
week, next year, the days of the week and the months
of the year."
  "Yes, Taira-san." Carefully,
Hiraga said a Japanese word, watched as
Tyrer wrote it phonetically in roman letters.
Then Hiraga wrote the characters in the space
provided and again watched while Tyrer copied
them. "You good student. A'ways use same
order for strokes, easy, then no forget."
  "Yes, I'm beginning to understand. Thank you,
you're very helpful," Tyrer replied
pleasantly, enjoying writing and reading and learning
--and teaching him in return, noticing that Nakama
was highly intelligent and a quick study. He worked
through the list with him, and when he was satisfied he
said, "Good. Thank you. Now please go
to Raiko-san and confirm my appointment for tomorrow."
  ""Conf'rm," p'rease?"
  "Make sure of. Make sure my
appointment is certain."
  "Ah, understand." Hiraga rubbed his chin, already
dark with an overnight stubble. "I go now
conf'rm."
  "I'll be back after lunch. Please be here,
then we can practice conversation and you can tell me
more about Japan. How do I say that in
Japanese?" Hiraga gave him the words.
Tyrer wrote them phonetically in an exercise
book, now crammed with words and phrases,
repeated them several times until satisfied.
He was about to dismiss him, then, on a sudden thought
said, "What's a "ronin"?"
  Hiraga thought a moment, then explained as
simply as he could. But not about shishi.
  "Then you're a ronin, outlawed?"
  "Hai."
  Thoughtfully Tyrer thanked him and let him go.
He stifled a yawn. Last night he had
slept badly, his world upside down at
Raiko's unexpected rejection.
  Damn Raiko, damn Fujiko, he thought,
putting on his top hat, preparing to walk down
High Street to the Club for tiffin lunch.
Damn learning Japanese and damn everything, my
head aches and I'll never never never learn this
dreadfully complicated language. "Don't be
ridiculous," he said aloud. Of course you will,
you've got Nakama and Andr`e, two very good
teachers, tonight you'll have a good supper, a bottle
of champagne with someone jolly, and so to bed. And
don't damn Fujiko, soon you'll sleep with
her again. Oh God, I hope so!
  The day was fair and the bay crowded with ships.
Traders were converging on the Club. "Oh
hello, Andr`e! Good to see you, would you care
to join me for lunch?"
  "Thank you no." Poncin did not stop.
  "What's up? You all right?"
  "Nothing's up. Some other time."
  "Tomorrow?" Not like Andr`e to be so abrupt.
Damn I wanted to ask him what I should--
  "I'll join you, Phillip, if I may,"
McFay said.
  "Of course, Jamie. You look hung over,
old chap."
  "I am. You look the same. That was some
party."
  "Yes. How's Malcolm?"
  "Not so hot. He's one of the things I wanted
to talk about." They found a table, the room
smoke-filled, airless and crowded, everyone as
usual in frock coats.
  They were sitting at a corner table, Chinese
servants carrying trays of roast beef, chicken
pies, fish pies, fish soup, Cornish
pasties, Yorkshire puddings, salt pork,
curries and bowls of rice for the old China
Hands, plus whisky, rum, gin, porter,
champagne, red and white wine and tankards of
beer. Fly swots laid beside every place.
  McFay used the fly whisk. "Wanted to ask
you to talk to Malcolm, not at my
suggestion, tell him it'd be a good idea to go
back to Hong Kong as soon as possible."
  "But Jamie, I'm sure he will, without my
saying so. He doesn't listen to me, why should
he? What's up?"
  "His mother. I'm afraid now that's no
secret. Don't say anything but she writes
by every mail ordering me to order him back--there's not
a bloody thing I can do, he just won't listen and
when the news of the party and his formal engagement
reaches Hong Kong ..." McFay rolled his
eyes. "Ayeeyah! The shit will spread from here
to Yedo."
  In spite of McFay's seriousness Tyrer
laughed. "It already has, it's stinky poo like never
before. The Legation garden's knee-deep in a new
dressing of prime."
  "Oh?" The Scot frowned and sniffed the air.
"Hadn't noticed. How's the curry?" he
asked a neighbor.
  "Hot, Jamie." The man, Lunkchurch,
spat a piece of chicken bone into the floor
sawdust. "I'm on seconds."
  Tyrer beckoned one of the waiters brushing past
but the toothy youth deliberately avoided seeing
him.
  "Hey, Dew neh loh moh, waiter!"
McFay shouted irritably. "Curry plenty
quick, heya!"
  There was a shout of laughter and much jeering and
catcalls at the Chinese curse words from the
traders and merchants, and sour looks from the
padre of the Highland Battalion who was lunching
expansively with his Church of England counterpart from
the Dragoons, and their own pastor.
  A plate of blood-rare roast beef was
plunked down vigorously in front of
McFay. "Curry, Mass'er, plenty werry
quick quick heya?" the young servant said, beaming.
  Exasperated, McFay shoved the plate
back. "This's roast beef for God's sake!
Curry, for Christ's sake, fetch CURRY!"
  "I'll have the chicken pie," Tyrer said
hastily.
  Grumbling the servant went back to the kitchen
and once inside the door bellowed with laughter
amidst the pandemonium there. "Noble House Fay
blew up like a barrel of fireworks when I shoved
roast beef under his bulbous nose, pretending I
thought it was curry. Ayeeyah," he
said, holding his stomach with laughter, "I almost
shat. Baiting foreign devils is more fun than
fornication!"
  Others laughed with him until the Head Cook
reached over and belted him around the face.
"Listen, you dirty little fornicator--and the rest of
you--don't bait Noble House foreign devils
until Noble House Chen says it is all right.
Now take Noble House Fay his curry quickly
and don't spit in it or I'll feed you your
testicles in batter."
  "Ayeeyah, spitting in foreign devil food
is quite ordinary, Honorable Chief Cook," the
youth muttered, his head almost off his shoulders,
picked up a plate of chicken pie as well,
then rushed to obey.
  The plate of curry and bowl of rice banged
on the table in front of McFay. "Curry,
Mass'er, you wan' heya never mind." The youth
hurried away, cursing inwardly, head aching, but
still content for though he had not dared to disobey the Head
Cook, he had kept his dirty thumb in the
curry all the way from the kitchen.
  "Rude bastard," Jamie said. "Ten
dollars to a busted flush the bugger spat in it
bringing it here."
  "If you're so sure, why shout at him?"
Tyrer began cutting the Melton
Mowbray-type pie with its thick crust.
  "He needs it, they all need, and a good kick
in the backside as well." With gusto McFay
began tucking into the yellowish, gruel-like mutton
and potato curry, globules of fat swimming
on the surface. "Next, I hear you smuggled
a samurai out of Yedo who speaks some
English."
  Tyrer almost choked on a piece of chicken.
"Rubbish!"
  "Then why're you almost purple, for goodness'
sake? You're talking to me, Noble House
McFay! Come on, Phillip, how do you
expect to keep that secret here? You were
overheard." Perspiration dotted his brow from the
heat of the curry, from time to time waving the flies
away. "This's hot enough to fry your balls off--
good though. You want to try some?"
  "No thanks."
  Happily McFay continued to eat. Then, between
mouthfuls his voice hardened though he still spoke
confidentially. "Unless you talk to me
openly about him, old chap, in confidence--my word
on it--and share everything, all his info, I'll
make an announcement here and now--to him." His
spoon pointed at Nettlesmith, editor of the
Yokohama Guardian, who was already watching
them interestedly. A splatter of curry fell
on the tablecloth. "If Wee Willie reads
about your secret first in the paper, he'll bust a
gut like you've never seen."
  All Tyrer's hunger had vanished.
Queasily he said, "I, it's true we helped
a dissident escape from Yedo. That's all I can
say. Now he's under H.m.'s protection for the
moment. Sorry, can't say any more, Official
Secrets."
  McFay eyed him shrewdly. "Her
Britannic Majesty's protection eh?"
  "Yes, sorry. Closed mouth catchee no
flies, can't say any more. Secrets of
State."
  "Interesting." McFay finished the plate and
shouted for a second helping. "But in return I
won't tell a soul."
  "Sorry, I'm sworn to secrecy." Tyrer
was sweating too, a way of life in Asia
except during the winter and spring months, and also
because his secret was known. Even so, he was pleased
with the way he was handling Jamie, undoubtedly the
most important of the Yokohama traders.
"I'm sure you understand."
  McFay nodded pleasantly, concentrating on
his curry. "I understand very well, old chap. The
very second I'm finished, Nettlesmith gets
the exclusive."
  "You wouldn't dare!" Tyrer was shocked.
"State s--"
  "Balderdash on State secrets,"
McFay hissed. "First I don't believe you,
second, even if it was we've the right to know,
we're the State, by God, not a bunch of
diplomat scallywags who can't fart their way out
of an empty bag!"
  "Now look here ..."
  "I'm looking. Share, Phillip, or read
about it in the afternoon edition." McFay's beam was
seraphic as he sopped up the last of the gravy
with a final hunk of bread, and consumed it. He
belched and pushed his chair away from the table and
began to get up. "On your own head."
  "Wait."
  "Everything? You agree to tell me everything?"
  Numbly Tyrer nodded. "If you swear
to keep it secret."
  "Good, but not here. My office's safer. Come
on." As he passed Nettlesmith he said,
"What's new, Gabriel?"
  "Read the afternoon edition, Jamie. War soon
in Europe, terrible in America, war brewing
here."
  "Just the usual. Well, see y--"
  "Afternoon, Mr. Tyrer." Nettlesmith's
canny eyes washed over him as he scratched
thoughtfully then put his attention to McFay again.
"I've an advanced copy of the last chapter of
Great Expectations."
  Jamie shuddered to a stop, Phillip too.
"I don't believe it, by God!"
  "Ten dollars and the promise of an
exclusive."
  "What exclusive?"
  "When you have one. I'll trust you." Again the
shrewd eyes looked at Tyrer who tried not
to wince.
  "This afternoon, Gabriel? Without fail?"
  "Yes, for one hour, so you can't copy it--it's
my exclusive. It cost me almost every favor I
have in Fleet Street to aquir--"
  "To steal. Two dollars?"
  "Eight, but your hour's after Norbert's."
  "My last offer, eight--and I read it first?"
  "Plus the exclusive? Good. You're a
gentleman and a scholar, Jamie. I'll be in
your office at three."

  Through his open window Tyrer heard the ship's
bell at the Harbor Master's office sound
eight bells. His feet were propped on his
desk, and he was dozing, his afternoon calligraphy
exercises forgotten. No need to look at the
mantelpiece clock. His brain told him it was
4:00 P.m. Now aboard ships would be the first
afternoon dogwatch, a two-hour period lasting from
4:00 P.m. to 6:00 P.m., then the
second from 6:00 P.m. to 8:00 P.m.,
thence to the normal four-hour periods until tomorrow
at 4:00 P.m. Marlowe had explained that
dogwatches had been invented to allow crews to be
rotated.
  He yawned and opened his eyes, thinking, Not much
more than half a year ago, I'd never
even heard of a dogwatch or been on a warship
and now I'm telling time by ship's bells as easy
as with a timepiece.
  His mantelpiece clock chimed four.
Exactly correct. In half an hour I'm
to see Sir William. The Swiss can
certainly make chronometers, better than us.
Where the devil's Nakama? Has he run off?
He should have been back hours ago. What the
devil does Sir William want? Hope
to God he hasn't heard about my secret.
Hope he just wants more dispatches copied.
Blast it that my writing's the best in the Legation,
I'm supposed to be a translator not a
clerk! Damn damn damn!
  He got up wearily, tidied his work and began
to wash his hands in the basin, getting the ink off his
fingers. A knock. "Come in."
  Behind Hiraga was a Redcoat sergeant and a
soldier, both with bayoneted rifles and both
angry. Hiraga was bruised, dishevelled,
grey with rage and almost naked, hat gone,
turban gone, his villager kimono in shreds.
The Sergeant shoved him forward, bayonet ready,
and saluted. "We caught 'im climbing in over
the fence, sir. We 'ad the devil of a time
getting 'im nice and quiet. 'e's got a
pass, signed by you. Is it real?"
  "Yes, yes it is." Aghast, Tyrer came
forward. "He's a guest here, Sergeant, a
guest of Sir William, and me, he's a
Japanese teacher."
  "A teacher, eh?" the Sergeant said grimly.
"Well, tell the bugger teachers don't climb
fences, don't try to run off, don't 'ave
samurai 'aircuts, don't frighten people or fight
like a bag full of tomcats--I've one man
wiv 'is arm broke and another wiv a busted
nose. Next time we catch 'im at it, we
won't be so careful." Both soldiers stomped
off.
  Tyrer closed the door, rushed to the sideboard
and brought some water back. "Here."
  Hiraga shook his head, choked with rage.
  "Please. Would you like sak`e or beer?"
  "Iy`e."
  "Please ... well, sit down and tell me
what happened."
  Hiraga began pouring out an explanation in
Japanese.
  "Gomen nasai, Ing'erish dozo."
Sorry, English please.
  With an effort, Hiraga changed to English and with
long seething pauses between words he said, "Many
guard at Gate and Bridge. I go through
swamp, go through water, over fence. These so'dier
see me. I stop, bow, reach for pass, they throw
to ground. Fight, but too many." Then he followed
with another searing flood of Japanese venom and
promises of revenge.
  When the paroxysm was spent, Tyrer said,
"Sorry but it's your own fault ..." He
darted back involuntarily as Hiraga whirled
on him. "Stop it!" he said angrily. "The
soldier was right. Samurai frighten people! Sir
William told you to be careful, so did I,
we asked you to be careful."
  "I was being polite, only doing what was
correct!" Hiraga said in angry
Japanese. "Those ill-mannered apes fell
on me, I was reaching for the pass, it was difficult
to find. Apes, I'll kill them all!"
  Tyrer's heart was pounding and the sweet sick of
fear was in his mouth. "Listen, we must solve this
together, quickly. When Sir William hears about this
he may throw you out of the Settlement! You and I
must solve this, understand?"
  "Iy`e! What is "so'rve" please?"
  Tyrer was thankful to hear the "please" and
held on to his fright. This fellow's clearly as
dangerous and as violent and hotheaded as any
samurai in Japan. Thank God he's not
armed. ""Solve" means to arrive at an
understanding. We must solve this problem, we must, you
and I, how to have you live here safely. You
understand?"
  "Hai. So desu ka! Wakarimasu.
Taira-san me we so'rve prob'rem."
Hiraga curbed his rage. "P'rease, what
sugg'st? Pass no good for so'dier. Men who
see me, hate. How so'rve this matter?"
  "First ... first there's a good old English
custom. Whenever we have to solve a serious
problem. We have tea."
  Hiraga stared at him blankly. Tyrer
rang a bell and ordered tea from Chen, the
Number One Boy who eyed Hiraga
suspiciously, an ugly chopper concealed behind his
back.
  While they waited Tyrer sat back
in his chair and solemnly stared out of the window,
desperately wanting the other man to tell him about
Fujiko but too well mannered to ask
directly such a leading question. Damn the fellow,
he was thinking, he should volunteer the info knowing I
must be anxious as hell and not make me bloody
wait. Got to teach him English ways, got
to teach him not to fly off the handle, the soldiers were
quite right. Got to make an English gentleman out
of him. But how? Then there's bloody Jamie
who's too damned clever.
  After lunch he had gone with McFay to his
office, was pressed to have a small brandy and then,
within minutes, he found that he had told him
everything.
  "Och, Phillip, you're brilliant,"
McFay had told him with genuine enthusiasm.
"That laddie will be a veritable gold mine if
asked the right questions. Did he say where he was
from?"'
  "Choshu, I think that's what he said."
  "I'd like to talk to him--privately."
  "If he talks to you then others are bound
to find out and then the news will be ... will be out
everywhere."
  "If I know, Norbert knows, and I'll
bet the Bakufu knows--they're no fools.
Sorry, but there are no secrets here, how many
times must I remind you?"'
  "All right, I'll ask him. But only if
I'm present when you see him."
  "Now that's not really necessary, Phillip, you've
got so much to do. I would'na want to waste your
time."
  "Yes or no!"
  McFay sighed. "You're a hard man,
Phillip. All right."
  "And if I also get to read the last chapter,
without charge, say tomorrow. You arrange it with
Nettlesmith."
  Sharply, McFay said, "If I have to pay
the astounding sum of eight dollars, you have
to contribute as well."
  "Then no interview, and I'll inform Sir
William." He smiled to himself remembering the
sour look on McFay's face and then, "Cha,
Mass'er plenty quick quick," interrupted his thoughts
bringing him back to Nakama. Chen put down the
tray, no longer carrying the chopper, but it was
close at hand, outside the door.
  Gravely Tyrer poured for both of them, added
milk and sugar and sipped the scalding, iron
black brew with relish. "That's better."
  Hiraga imitated him. It took all of his
willpower not to cry out from the heat, and to hold in
what was the foulest-tasting liquid he had ever had
in his life.
  "Good, eh?" Tyrer said with a beam, finishing his
cup. "Some more?"
  "No, no thank you. Ing'erish custom,
yes?"
  "English and American, yes, not French. The
French," Tyrer shrugged. "They've no taste."
  "Ah, so ka?" Hiraga had noticed the
slight sneer. "French not same as Ing'erish?"
he asked with a pretended innocence, his fury
compartmentalized for later.
  "My goodness me, no, not like them at all.
They're on the Continent, we're an island nation
like you. Different customs, different foods,
government, everything, and of course France's a
minor power compared to Britain." Tyrer stirred in
another spoon of sugar, pleased with himself that the
man's rage seemed to have dissipated. "Very
different."
  "Oh, so? Ing'erish and French warred hav?"
  Tyrer laughed. "Dozens of times over the
centuries, and allies in other wars--we were
allies in the last conflict." He told him
briefly about the Crimea, then about Napoleon
Bonaparte, the French revolution, and the present
Emperor Louis Napoleon. "He's
Bonaparte's nephew, an absolute buffoon.
Bonaparte wasn't, but one of the most evil men
ever born, he was responsible for hundreds of
thousands of deaths. But for Wellington and Nelson
and our troops he would have ruled the world. Are you
understanding all this?"
  Hiraga nodded, "No o'rr word, but
un'erstand." But he had caught the gist and this
turned his head upside down, though he could not
fathom why a great general should be considered evil.
"P'rease go on, Taira-san."
  For a little while Tyrer did, then stopped the
history lesson and gave him a lead: "Now
to your problem. When you left the Yoshiwara those
guards gave you no trouble?"
  "No, pretend take vegitab'res."
  "That's good, oh by the way, did you see
Raiko-san?"
  "Yes. Fujiko not possib're tomorrow."
  "Oh. Well never mind." Tyrer shrugged,
dying inside.
  But Hiraga saw the vast disappointment and
savored it. Sonno-joi, he thought grimly.
He had had to buy Fujiko's services himself but
he did not mind. Raiko had said: "Since you
pay well, though not gai-jin prices, I
agree. But he should bed her the day after. I
wouldn't want him to find another ..."
  Tyrer was saying, "Nakama-san, the only
real way you can be safe here is to never go out. I
won't send you to the Yoshiwara anymore. You must
stay here, inside the Legation."
  "Better, Taira-san, I stay in
vi'rrage, find safe house. Inside fence
safer. Each day I come at sunup, or when you
want, teach and to 'rearn. You very good Sensei.
This so'rve prob'rem, yes?"
  Tyrer hesitated, not wanting him off the leash
but no longer caring to have him too close. "Yes,
if first you show me where exactly and do not move
without telling me."
  In a moment Hiraga nodded and said, "I
agree. P'rease, you say so'diers good me
stay here and in vi'rrage?"
  "Yes, I'll do that. I'm sure Sir
William will agree."
  "Thank you, Taira-san. Say so'diers
also, if attack again I get katana."
  "You will do no such thing! I forbid it, Sir
William has forbidden it! No weapons, no
swords!"
  "P'rease you say so'dier, no attack
p'rease."
  "Yes, I'll do that but if you wear swords
here you will be killed, they'll shoot you!"
  Hiraga shrugged. "P'rease, no attack.
Wakatta?"
  Tyrer did not reply. Wakatta was the
imperious form of wakarimasu ka: Do you
understand?
  "Domo." With a contained violence that Tyrer
could almost smell, Nakama thanked him again and said
that he would return at dawn to guide him to the
safe house, and would be ready then to answer any
questions that he wanted to ask. He bowed stiffly.
Tyrer did the same. He walked out. It was
only then that Tyrer saw the extent of the bruises
over all his back and legs.

  That night the wind became changeable, the sea
choppy.
  Out in the roads the fleet was snug at anchor
and ready for sleep, the first night watch that came
on duty at 8:00 P.m. already at their
stations. Upwards of fifty men were in various
cells for various offenses and with varying degrees of
fear six were diligently making their own
cat-o'-nine-tails for the fifty lashes they were
due at dawn for conduct prejudicial to good
order and military discipline: one for threatening
to break the neck of a sodomite Bosun, three
for fighting, one for stealing a rum ration, and another
for swearing at an officer.
  Nine sea burials were scheduled for sunup.
  All ship's sick bays were overloaded with
sufferers of dysentery, diarrhea, the croup,
whooping cough, scarlet fever, measles, venereal
diseases, broken limbs, hernias and the like, routine
except for a dangerous fourteen with smallpox
aboard the flagship. Bleeding and violent
purges were the recommended cures for most
illnesses--the majority of doctors also being
barbers--except for the lucky few patients who
were given Dr. Collis's Tincture, one he
had invented during the Crimea that cut dysentery
deaths by three quarters: six drops of the dark,
opium-based liquid and your bowels began
to quieten.
  Throughout the Settlement everyone was preparing for
dinner and the most eagerly anticipated part of the
day: after-dinner conversation, discussing the day's
rumors or news--thank God the mail ship's
due tomorrow--enjoying the warm camaraderie and laughter
over spicy scandals, the ball, tension over
business problems and if war would begin, or about the
latest book someone had read, a new funny
story or poem another had thought up, or telling
tales of storms or ice lands or desert, or
journeys made to strange places throughout the
Empire--New Zealand, Africa and
Australia hardly explored but for coastal areas
--or the Wild West of America and Canada,
stories of the California gold rush of '48,
or visits to Spanish or French or
Russian America--Dmitri had once
sailed the mostly uncharted western seaboard from
San Francisco north to Russian Alaska
--each man telling of strange sights
he had seen, girls sampled or wars witnessed.
Good wine and drinks and pipes and tobacco from
Virginia, a few nightcaps at the Club,
then prayers and bed.
  A normal night in the Empire.
  Some hosts specialized in chorals or
poetry readings or excerpts from a coveted
novel, and tonight at Norbert Greyforth's
extremely private party, all guests sworn
to secrecy, a special reading of the last chapter
from the bootlegged copy he had had produced in his
allotted hour by putting all his fifty clerks
on to it. "If this leaks, the whole lot of you are
dismissed," he had threatened.
  In the Club they were still discussing the previous
night's ball and trying to work out how to have another.
"Why not make it a bloody weekly bash, eh?
Angel Tits can kick up her heels and show
her knickers for me every day of the week along with
Naughty Nellie Fortheringill--"
  "Stop calling her Angel Tits for
chrissake or else!"
  "Angel tits she has, and Angel Tits
she is!"
  To jeers and catcalls the fight started, bets
were taken and the two contenders, Lunkchurch and
Grimm, another trader, toed the line and tried
to smash each other senseless.
  Almost directly across the road, on the sea
side, was the large brick bungalow of the
British Legation, flagpole in the courtyard,
gardens, and surrounded like most important
dwellings with a defendable fence. Sir William
was already dressed for dinner and so was his main guest,
the Admiral, both were furious.
  "The bloody bastards!" the Admiral said, his
flushed face more flushed than usual, going to the
sideboard to pour another large whisky.
"They're beyond comprehension."
  "Totally." Sir William tossed the
scroll aside and glared at Johann and Tyrer
who stood in front of him. An hour ago the
scroll had arrived by messenger from the Japanese
Governor who had sent it on behalf of the
Bakufu, "Very urgent so sorry." Instead of
being in Dutch as was normal, it was in characters. With
Seratard's agreement, Johann had co-opted
one of the visiting French Jesuit missionaries and
had produced a rough copy that Tyrer at once
put into correct English. The
message was from the Council of Elders, and
signed by Anjo:

I communicate with you by dispatch. By orders of the
Sh@ogun, received from Ky@oto, the provisional
date of the meeting in nineteen days with the roju,
and meeting the same day with the Sh@ogun, is to be
postponed for three months as His Majesty will not
return until then. I therefore send you this first,
before holding a Conference as to the details. The
second installment of the gift is to be delayed for
thirty days. Respectful and humble
communication.

  "Johann," Sir William said, his voice
icy, "would you say this is unusually rude,
impolite and altogether vile?"
  The Swiss said cautiously, "I think that's
about right, Sir William."
  "For Christ sake, I've spent days
negotiating, threatening, losing sleep,
renegotiating until they swore on the
Sh@ogun's head to meet in Yedo on November
5th, the Sh@ogun on November 6th and now
this!" Sir William gulped his drink, choked and
swore for almost five minutes in English,
French and Russian, the others staring with admiration
at the gorgeously descriptive vulgarities.
  "Quite right," the Admiral said. "Tyrer, pour
Sir William another gin."
  Instantly Tyrer obeyed. Sir William
found his handkerchief, blew his nose, took some
snuff, sneezed and blew his nose again. "The
pox on all of them!"
  "What do you propose, Sir William?" the
Admiral asked, keeping the delight off his
face at this further humbling of his adversary.
  "Naturally I'll reply at once.
Please order the fleet to Yedo tomorrow to bombard
port facilities of my choosing."
  The Admiral's blue eyes narrowed. "I
think we will discuss this in private. Gentlemen!"
Tyrer and Johann at once began to leave.
  "No," Sir William said tightly.
"Johann, you can go, please wait outside.
Tyrer's my personal staff, he stays."
  The Admiral's neck reddened but he said
nothing until the door had closed. "You know my
views on bombardment very well. Until the
order from England arrives,
I-will-not-order-it unless I am attacked."
  "Your position makes negotiations
impossible. Power comes from the barrels of our
cannon, nothing else!"
  "I agree, we only disagree on timing."
  "Timing is my decision. Good. Then kindly
just order a small cannonade, twenty shells
on targets of my choosing."
  "Dammit, no! Am I not clear? When the
order arrives I will conflagrate Japan if
necessary, not before."
  Sir William flushed. "Your reluctance
to assist Her Majesty's policy in the most
minor way is beyond belief."
  "Personal aggrandizement seems to be the real
problem. What do a few months matter? Nothing
--except prudence!"
  "Prudence be damned," Sir William said
angrily. "Of course we will get instructions
to proceed as I, I repeat I advise! It
is imprudent to delay. By tomorrow's mail I will
request you are replaced by an officer who is more
tuned to Her Majesty's interests--and battle
trained!"
  The Admiral went purple. Only a few
knew that in all his career he had never
participated in a sea or land engagement. When
he could talk he said, "That, sir, is your
privilege. Meanwhile until my
replacement, or yours arrives, I command Her
Majesty's Forces in Japan. Good night
sir." The door slammed.
  "Rude bugger," Sir William muttered,
then to his surprise saw Tyrer who had been
standing behind him, out of his eye line, paralyzed by the
salvos. "You'd best keep your mouth shut.
Did they teach you that?"
  "Yessir, yes indeed."
  "Good," Sir William said and took his
agitated mind off the Gordian knot of the
Bakufu, roju and intransigence of the
Admiral for later. "Tyrer, get yourself a
sherry, you look as though you need one, and you'd
better join us for dinner as the Admiral has
declined my invitation. You play backgammon?"
  "Yes sir, thank you sir," Tyrer said
meekly.
  "While I think of it, what's this I hear about
a skirmish, your pet samurai versus the
British Army?"
  Tyrer gave him the details and his solution,
but not about his Sensei's threat to get swords,
feeling ever more guilty about hiding facts from the
Minister. "I'd like to retain him, of course with
your approval, sir, but he is a very good teacher
and I think will be most useful to us."
  "I doubt that and it's more important to have no more
trouble here. No telling what the fellow will do, he
could become a viper in our nest. He's ordered
out tomorrow."
  "But sir, he's already given me some very
valuable information." Tyrer held on to his sudden
distress and blurted out, "For instance he told me
the Sh@ogun's only a boy, barely sixteen,
he's only the puppet of the Bakufu, the real
power belongs to their Emperor--he used the title
Mikado several times--who lives in
Ky@oto."
  "God Almighty!" Sir William
exploded, "is this true?"
  It was on the tip of Tyrer's tongue to tell
about the English speaking, but he managed to stop
himself. "I don't know yet sir, I haven't
had time to really question him, he's difficult to bring
out, but yes, I think he told me the truth."
  Sir William stared at him, his mind agog
with the implications of the information. "What else has
he told you?"
  "I've only just started and it all takes time
as you'll appreciate." Tyrer's excitement
picked up. "But he's told me about ronin. The
word means "wave," sir, they're called
ronin because they're as free as the waves. They're
all samurai, but outlawed for different reasons.
Most of them are adversaries of the Bakufu, like
Nakama, who believe they've usurped power from
the Midako, sorry, Mikado as I said."
  "Wait a moment, slow down, slow down,
Tyrer. There's plenty of time. Now, what is a
ronin, exactly?"
  Tyrer told him.
  "Good God!" Sir William thought a
moment. "So ronin are samurai who are either
outlawed because their king has lost favor, or
outlawed by their kings for crimes real or imagined,
or voluntary outlaws who are banding together
to overthrow the central government of the puppet
Sh@ogun?"
  "Yes sir. He says illegal
government."
  Sir William sipped the last of his gin,
nodding to himself, astonished and elated as he ran this
all around in his mind. "Then Nakama's a
ronin, and what you call a dissident, and what
I'd call a revolutionary?"
  "Yes sir. Excuse me, sir, can I sit
down?" Tyrer asked shakily, desperate
to blurt out the real truth about the man and afraid
to do so.
  "Of course, of course, Tyrer, so sorry,
but first get another sherry and bring me a tot of
gin," Sir William watched him, delighted with
him yet somehow perturbed. Years of dealing with
diplomats, spies, half-truths, lies and
blatant disinformation were calling up warning signals
that something was being hidden from him. He accepted the
drink. "Thanks. Take that chair, it's the most
comfortable. Cheers! You must be speaking very good
Japanese to get all this in such a short time,"
he said easily.
  "No sir, sorry, I don't, but I spend
all my time at it. With Nakama, it's, well,
mostly patience, gestures, a few English
words and Japanese words and phrases Andr`e
Poncin has given me, he's been
tremendously helpful, sir."
  "Does Andr`e know what this man has told
you?"
  "No sir."
  "Tell him nothing. Nothing at all. Anyone
else?"
  "No sir, except Jamie McFay."
Tyrer gulped his sherry. "He knew a little already
and, well, he's very persuasive and he, well,
pried it out about the Sh@ogun."
  Sir William sighed. "Yes, Jamie's
persuasive, to say the least, and always knows far more
than he tells."
  He sat back in the comfortable old leather
swivel chair and sipped his drink, his mind roving
over all this priceless new knowledge, already redesigning
his reply to tonight's rude missive, wondering how
far he dare gamble and how far he could trust
Tyrer's information. As always in these circumstances,
queasily he remembered the Permanent Under
Secretary's parting salvos about failure.
  "About Nakama," he said. "I'll agree
to your plan, Phillip ... may I call you
Phillip?"
  Tyrer flushed with pleasure at the
sudden and unexpected compliment. "Of course
sir, thank you sir."
  "Good, thank you. For the moment I'll agree
to your plan, but for God's sake be careful of
him, don't forget ronin have committed all the
murders, except poor Canterbury."
  "I'll be careful, Sir William.
Don't worry."
  "Get all you can out of him but tell no one
else and give me the information at once. For
God's sake be careful, always have a revolver
on hand and if he shows the slightest indication of
violence, scream bloody murder, shoot him or
clap him in irons."

  Next door to the British Legation was the
American, then the Dutch, Russian, German
and last, the French, and there, in her suite that
evening, Angelique was dressing for dinner,
helped by Ah Soh. In an hour, the dinner
Seratard was giving her and Malcolm
to celebrate their engagement, was due to begin. Then
later there would be music. "But don't play
too long, Andr`e, say you're tired," she had
cautioned him earlier. "Leave plenty of time for
your mission, no? Men are so lucky."
  She was glad and sad that she had moved. It's
wiser, better, she thought. In three days I can
move back. A new life, a new ...
  "Wat wrong, Miss'ee?"
  "Nothing, Ah Soh." Angelique forced her
mind away from what must soon be endured, and
buried her fear deeper.
  Just down the street in the best location on the
waterfront, the Struan Building was well
lit, as was Brock and Sons, next door,
both with many clerks and shroffs still at their work. Today
Malcolm Struan had moved into the tai-pan
suite that was much bigger and more comfortable than the one
he had been using and now he was fighting his way
into his dinner clothes. "What's your advice,
Jamie? Damned if I know what to do about Mother
and her letters but that's my damned problem not yours--
she's giving you stick too, isn't she?"
  Jamie McFay shrugged. "It's awfully
difficult for her. From her point of view she's
right, she only wants the best for you. I think
she's worried to death over your health, you being so
far away, she unable to come here. And nothing about
Struans can be solved from Yokohama,
everything in Hong Kong. China Cloud docks
in a few days from Shanghai, then a quick turn
around for Hong Kong. You'll be returning with
her?"
  "No, and please don't bring it up again,"
Struan said sharply. "I'll tell you when we,
Angelique and I, are leaving. I just hope
to God Mother isn't on China Cloud--that'd be
the last straw." Struan bent to pull on his
boots, failed, the pain too much. "Sorry,
could you? Thanks," then he burst out, "this being like a
fucking cripple is driving me over the brink."
  "I can imagine." McFay covered his
surprise. This was the first time he had ever heard
Struan use that expletive. "I'd be the
same, no, not the same, a bloody sight
worse," he added kindly, liking him, admiring
his courage.
  "I'll be fine when we're married and all the
waiting's over, everything tidy." Struan with
difficulty used the chamber pot, painful always,
and saw a few flecks of blood in the stream.
He had told Hoag about it yesterday when it had
begun anew and Hoag had said not to worry.
"Then why do you look so worried?"'
  "I'm not, Malcolm, just concerned. With these
kinds of vicious internal wounds, any indication
during the healing process should be noted ..."
  Struan finished and hobbled over to the chair by the
window and sat gratefully. "Jamie. I need
a favor."
  "Of course, anything, what can I do?"
  "Can you, well, I must have a woman. Could you
arrange it from the Yoshiwara?"
  Jamie was startled. "I, yes, I imagine
so." Then he added, "Is that wise?"
  A gust rattled the shutters and tugged at
trees and gardens, clattering a few loose roof
tiles to the ground, sending the rats scurrying from the
piles of garbage thrown carelessly into the High
Street and from the encircling turgid and fetid
canal that was also served as a sewer.
  "No," Malcolm said.

  Half a mile away from the Struan
Building, near Drunk Town, in a
nondescript dwelling in the Japanese
village, Hiraga was lying on his stomach,
naked, being massaged. The house was ordinary, the
facade facing the street decrepit, a
pattern of the others that lined both sides of the narrow
dirt roadway, each serving as home,
warehouse, and shop during the day. Inside, like many
that belonged to the more substantial merchants, everything
was sparkling clean, polished, cherished and
extensive. It was the house of the shoya, the
village elder.
  The masseuse was blind. She was in her early
twenties, firmly built with a gentle face and
sweet smile. By ancient custom throughout most of
Asia, blind people had a monopoly on the art, though
there were also practitioners with normal sight. Again,
by ancient custom, the blind were always quite safe and never
to be touched.
  "You are very strong, samurai-sama," she said,
breaking a silence. "Those you fought must be dead or
suffering."
  For a moment Hiraga did not reply, enjoying
the deep probing and wise fingers that sought out his
knotted muscles and relaxed them. "Perhaps."
  "Please, may I suggest, I have some
special oil from China that will help heal your
cuts and bruises quickly?"
  He smiled. This was an often-used ploy to gain
extra money. "Good, use it."
  "Oh but you smile, honored samurai! It
is not a trick to get more money," she said at
once, her fingers kneading his back. "My grandmother
who was also blind gave me the secret."
  "How did you know I smiled?"
  She laughed and the sound reminded him of a lark
sailing the dawn air currents. "A smile
begins in many parts of the body. My fingers listen
to you--to your muscles and even sometimes to your thoughts."
  "And what am I thinking now?"
  "About sonno-joi. Ah, I was right!" Again
the laugh that disconcerted him. "But don't be
afraid, you have said nothing, the patrons here have said
nothing, I will say nothing but my fingers tell me
you are a special swordsman, the best I have
ever served. Clearly you're not Bakufu, therefore
you must be ronin, ronin by choice because you are a
guest in this house, therefore shishi, the first we have ever
had here." She bowed. "We are honored. If
I were a man I would support sonno-joi."
  Deliberately her steel-hard fingertip
pressed a nerve center and she felt the tremor
of pain go through him and it pleased her that she could
help him more than he knew. "So sorry but this
point is very important to rejuvenate
you and keep your juices flowing."
  He grunted, the pain grinding him to the futons
yet strangely pleasing. "Your grandmother was also a
masseuse?"
  "Yes. In my family at least one girl in
every second generation is born blind. It was my
turn in this lifetime."
  "Karma."
  "Yes. It is said that in China today, fathers or
mothers will blind one of their daughters so that when she
grows up she will find employment for all her
life."
  Hiraga had never heard this but he believed it
and was incensed. "This is not China and never will be and
one day we will take China and civilize her."
  "Eeee, so sorry to disturb your harmony,
Lord, please excuse me, oh so sorry. Ah,
that's better, again so sorry, please excuse
me. You were saying, Lord ... civilize China?
As Dictator Nakamura wanted to do? Is it
possible?"
  "Yes, one day. It is our destiny to gain the
Dragon Throne, as it is your destiny
to massage and not to talk."
  Again her laugh was gentle. "Yes, Lord."
  Hiraga sighed as her finger released the
pressure point and left a pervading, soothing
glow in place of pain. So everyone knows I'm
shishi, he thought. How long before I'm betrayed?
Why not? Two koku is a fortune.
  Getting into this haven had not been easy. When
he had strode into the quarter there was an aghast
silence for here was a samurai, a samurai without
swords, looking like a wild man. The street
cleared except those nearby who knelt and
awaited their fate.
  "You, old man, where is your nearest
ryokan--Inn."
  "We don't have one, Lord, there's no need,
Honored Lord," the old shopkeeper muttered,
his fear making him gabble on, "there's no need as
our Yoshiwara is nearby, bigger than most
cities with dozens of places you can stay in and
over a hundred girls not counting maids, three
real geisha and seven trainees, it's that way
..."
  "Enough! Where's the house of the shoya?"'
  "There, Lord."
  "Where, fool? Get up, show me the way."
  Still enraged he followed him down the
street, wanting to smash the eyes that watched from every
opening and crush the whispers in his wake.
  "There, Lord."
  Hiraga waved him away. The sign outside
the open shop that was filled with goods of all
description but empty of people announced that this was the
residence and place of business of Ichi
Ryoshi, shoya, rice merchant and banker, the
Yokohama agent for the Gyokoyama. The
Gyokoyama was a zaibatsu--meaning a
closely knit family complex of businesses--
immensely powerful in Yedo and Osaka as rice
traders, sak`e and beer distillers, and
all-important, bankers.
  He took hold of himself. With great care and
politeness he knocked, squatted on his heels
and began to wait, trying to dominate the pain from the
beating he had taken from the ten-man patrol. At
length a strong-faced, middle-aged man came out
into the open shop, knelt and bowed. Hiraga bowed
back equally, introduced himself as Nakama
Otami and mentioned that his grandfather was also shoya, not
saying where but giving enough information for him to know it was the
truth and that, perhaps, as there was no ryokan to stay
at, the shoya might have a room for paying guests
that was not being used. "My grandfather also is honored
to have dealings with the Gyokoyama zaibatsu--his
villages sell all their crops through it," he
had said politely. "In fact I would like you,
please, to send my pledge to them in Osaka, and
would be grateful if you would advance me some cash
against it."
  "Yedo is nearer than Osaka,
Otami-san."
  "Yes, but Osaka is better for me than
Yedo," Hiraga said, not wanting to risk Yedo
where there could be leaks to the Bakufu. He noted the
cool, unafraid appraisal and hid his hatred
but even daimyos had to be careful when dealing with the
Gyokoyama or their agents, even Lord Ogama
of Choshu. It was common knowledge that Ogama was heavily
in debt to them, with years of future revenue already
pledged as security.
  "My company is honored to serve old
customers. Please, how long would you wish to stay
in my house?"'
  "A few days, if it would not inconvenience
you." Hiraga told him about Tyrer and the problem
of the soldiers, only because he was sure the news
had preceded him.
  "You may stay at least three days,
Otami-san. So sorry, but you must be prepared
to leave quickly in case of a sudden raid, by day or
night."
  "I understand. Thank you."
  "Please excuse me but I would like an order
signed by this Taira, or better the chief of the
gai-jin, ordering me to open my house to you, in
case or when the Bakufu arrive here."
  "I will arrange it." Hiraga bowed his
thanks and hid his irritation at the restraints.
"Thank you."
  The shoya ordered a maid to bring tea and
writing materials and watched while Hiraga
wrote the pledge that asked the amount be deducted
from the account of Shinsaku Otami, the secret
code name of his father. He signed it and sealed it with
his chop, signed and sealed the receipt for
Ryoshi, who agreed to advance half the amount at
the usual interest of two percent per month, for the
three months that would be needed to send the paper
to Osaka and complete the transaction. "Do you
want the money in cash?"'
  "No, thank you, I still have a few oban,"
he said exaggerating, down to his last two.
"Please open an account for me, deduct the
charges for my room and food, I need some
clothes, swords, and could you please arrange a
masseuse."
  "Of course, Otami-san. About clothes, the
servant will show you our stock. Choose what you
want. As to swords for sale," Ryoshi
shrugged, "the only ones I have are trinkets for
gai-jin and hardly worth your trouble but you may
see what I have. Perhaps I could obtain proper
ones for you. Now I will show you your room and your
private entrance and exit--there is a guard here,
by day and by night."
  Hiraga had followed him. Never once had
Ryoshi commented on his nakedness or bruises or
asked any questions. "You are welcome and honor
my poor house," he had said and left him.
  Remembering the way it was said suddenly made
Hiraga's skin crawl--so polite and grave
but underneath so deadly. Disgusting, he thought, disgusting
that we samurai are kept in poverty by corrupt
daimyos and Sh@oguns and Bakufu and forced
to borrow from these low-class zaibatsu who are
nothing but filthy, money-grubbing merchants who
act as though their money gives them power
over us. By all gods when the Emperor has
regained power there'll be a reckoning, merchants
and zaibatsu will begin to pay. ...
  In the same instant he felt her fingers stop.
"What is it, Lord?" the masseuse asked,
frightened.
  "Nothing, nothing. Please continue."
  Her fingers obeyed, but now their touch was different
and there was tension in the room.
  It was an eight-mat room, the futons stuffed
with down, the tatami of good quality and shojis
recently renewed with oiled paper. In the
takoyama niche was an oil lamp, flower
arrangement and small scroll painting of a vast
landscape, its only habitation a tiny cottage
in a bamboo grove, with an even tinier woman
forlorn in the doorway, peering into the distance--a
love poem beside it.

Waiting,
Listening to the rain
Beating on the rain

  So lonely, filled with so much hope for her
man's return.
  Hiraga was drifting into sleep when the screen
door slid back. "Excuse me, Lord." The
servant knelt and said uneasily, "So sorry,
there is a low-class person outside who
claims to know you, asks to see you, so sorry
to disturb you, but he is very insistent an--"
  "Who is he? What's his name?"
  "He ... wouldn't give a name, and he
didn't ask for you by name, Lord, but kept on
saying: "Say to the samurai: Todo is the
brother of Joun.""
  Instantly Hiraga was on his feet. As he
slipped on his yukata, he asked the masseuse
to come back tomorrow at the same time and dismissed her,
moved closer to the two swords he had borrowed
until the shoya could obtain better, and knelt in
a defensive-attack position facing the door.
"Send him here, and keep everyone else away."
  The slight, dirty young peasant with a tattered
kimono grovelled along the passageway and
went onto his knees outside the door. "Thank
you Lord, thank you for seeing me," the youth mumbled
then looked up and beamed inanely, his front
teeth missing. "Thank you, Lord."
  Hiraga glowered at him, then gasped
with disbelief: "Ori? But, but it's impossible!"
then peered closer and saw that his tooth had just been
blacked out as part of his disguise, in this light the
illusion perfect. But no mistaking that Ori was
no longer obviously samurai: his topknot had
been cut off and all hair on the back and
sides of his head roughly trimmed to the same
length as the two-week stubble that covered his pate.
"Why?" he asked helplessly.
  Ori grinned and sat close to him. "Bakufu
are looking for ronin, eh?" he whispered, keeping
his voice down against ears they both knew would be
listening. "I'm not less a samurai but now I
can pass any barrier, eh?"
  The air hissed out of Hiraga's mouth with
admiration. "You are right. You are brilliant,
sonno-joi doesn't depend on a
hairstyle. So simple--I would never have thought of
it."
  "It occurred to me last night. I was thinking
about your problem, Hiraga, an--"
  "Careful. Here my name's Nakama
Otami."
  "Ah, so that's it! Good." Ori smiled. "I
did not know what to use, hence the code."
  "Have they found Todo and the others?"
  "No, no they are still missing. They have to be
dead. We heard Joun was executed like a common
criminal, but still don't know how he was caught."
  "Why come here, Ori? It's too dangerous."
  "Not like this, nor at night, and I needed to test
the new Ori and to see you." Squeamishly he
ran his hand over his head stubble, scratching his
scalp, his face freshly shaven. "It feels
awful, and dirty, somehow obscene, but never mind,
now I am safe to get to Ky@oto. I will leave
in two days."
  Hiraga stared at his head fascinated, still
bewildered by the astonishing change. "If anything
makes you safe that should, except that now all
samurai will take you for a common man. How can you
wear swords?"
  "When I need swords I will wear a hat.
When I am disguised I have this." Ori slipped
his good hand into his sleeve and brought out a
two-shot derringer.
  Again Hiraga's face lit up. "Eeee,
brilliant! Where did you get it?"
  "Fujiko. She sold it to me, with a box of
cartridges. A client gave it to her
as a present when he left Yokohama.
Imagine! A low-class whore with such a
treasure."
  Hiraga held it carefully, weighing it in his
hand, pointing it then lifting the catch to see the two
bronze cartridges neatly in the barrels. "You
could certainly kill two men before you were killed,
if you were close enough."
  "One is enough to give you time to run off and get
some swords." Ori peered at Hiraga. "We
heard about the soldiers. I wanted to see if you
were all right. Baka! We will go to Ky@oto together
and leave this place to the dogs until we can come
back in force."
  Hiraga shook his head and told what really
happened, then about Tyrer and discovering the enmity between
the French and English, adding excitedly, "This is
one of the wedges we can drive between them. We get
them fighting amongst themselves, let them kill each
other for us, eh? I must stay, Ori. It is
only the beginning. We must learn all they know, be
able to think like them and then we can destroy them."
  Ori frowned, considering the reasons forandthe
reasons against--though he had not forgiven Hiraga
for forcing him to lose face and remove her cross,
he still had to protect sonno-joi. "In that
case, if you are to be our spy, you will have to be like
them in every way, and burrow into their society like a
bedbug, outwardly become friends, even wear
gai-jin clothes." At Hiraga's blank
look he added, "Why not? That will further
protect you, and make it easier for them to accept
you, neh?"
  "But why should they accept me?"
  "They should not, but they are fools. Taira will be
your spearhead. He can arrange it, order it.
He could insist."
  "Why should he?"
  "Barter Fujiko."
  "Eh?"
  "Raiko gave us the key: gai-jin are
different. They prefer to bed the same woman.
Help Raiko to wrap him in their net, then he
is your running dog because you are his indispensable
go-between. Tomorrow tell him, even though you were furious
with the soldiers, it was not his fault. With great
difficulty you sneaked back to the Yoshiwara and
arranged Fujiko for him for tomorrow evening and "so
sorry Taira-sama, it would be simpler for me
to arrange these trysts if I had proper
European clothes to pass the barriers, and so
on." Make her available, or not, get him
on her barb, and twist it. Eh?"
  Hiraga began laughing quietly. "Better
you stay here and not go to Ky@oto, your counsel is
too valuable."
  "Katsumata must be forewarned. Now, the
gai-jin woman?"
  "Tomorrow I will find out exactly where she is."
  "Good." The wind picked up and a gust passed
through the house, crackling the paper in the frames and
setting the oil flame dancing. Ori watched
him. "Have you seen her?"
  "Not yet. Taira's servants, a filthy
lot of Chinese, don't speak any language
I can understand so I could not find out from them, but the
biggest building in the Settlement belongs to the
man she is to marry."
  "She lives there?"
  "I am not sure but--" Hiraga stopped as
an idea barreled into his head. "Listen, if
I could become accepted, I could go everywhere, could
find out all about their defenses, could go aboard their
warships and ..."
  "And on a certain night," Ori said at
once, jumping ahead, "perhaps we could capture
one, or sink one."
  "Yes." Both men glowed at the thought, the
candle fluttering and casting strange shadows.
  "With the right wind," Ori said softly, "a south
wind like tonight, with five or six shishi, a few
kegs of oil already planted in the right warehouses
... even that is not necessary: we can make
incendiaries and start fires in the Yoshiwara. The
wind would jump those fires into the village and those
would spread to the Settlement and burn it up!
Neh?"
  "And the ship?"
  "In the confusion we row out to the big one. We
could do it, easily, neh?"
  "Not easily, but what a coup!"
  "Sonno-joi!"

                 

    Thursday, 16th October:
  "Come in! Ah, good morning, Andr`e,"
Angelique said with a warmth that belied her
anxiety. "You're very punctual. All's
well with you?"
  He nodded, closed the door of the small
ground-floor room adjoining her bedroom that
served as her boudoir in the French Legation,
once more astonished that she appeared so calm and could
make small talk. Politely he bent over
her hand and kissed it, then sat opposite her.
The room was drab with old chairs and chaise and
writing desk, plaster walls with a few cheap
oils by current French painters, Delacroix
and Corot. "The army taught me,
Punctuality is next to Godliness."
  She smiled at the pleasantry. "La! I
didn't know you had been in the army."
  "I had a commission in Algeria for a year when
I was twenty-two, after university--nothing very
grand, just helping to crush one of the usual
rebellions. The sooner we really stamp out the
troublemakers and annex all North Africa as
French territory the better." He waved
absently at the flies, and studied her. "You
look more beautiful than ever. Your, your state
suits you."
  Her eyes lost their color and became flinty.
Last night had been bad for her, the bed here in the
untidy, seedy bedroom uncomfortable. During the
dark time her anxieties had overridden her
confidence and she had become increasingly nervous about
leaving her suite next to Struan and all her
comfort, so hastily. In the dawn her humor had not
improved and again the all-consuming idea pervaded
her: men caused all her woes. Revenge will
be sweet. "You mean my marriage state to be,
no?"
  "Of course," he said after the barest pause, and
she wondered, aggravated, what was the matter with
him and why he was so boorish and distant like last
night when the music had gone on and on, without his
usual touch. He had dark rings under his eyes and
his features seemed sharper than usual.
  "Is anything wrong, my dear friend?"
  "No, dear Angelique, nothing, nothing at
all."
  Liar, she thought. Why is it men lie so much,
to others and to themselves? "You were successful?"
  "Yes and no."
  He knew that she was twisting on the spit andofa
sudden he wanted to make her squirm, wanted
to fan the flames to make her scream and pay for
Hana.
  You're mad, he thought. It's not
Angelique's fault. That is true but because of
her, last night I went to the Three Carp and
saw Raiko and while we talked in our
mixture of Japanese and English and pidgin
I suddenly felt that the other had just been a
rotten nightmare and that any moment Hana would
appear, the laugh in her eyes, and my heart would
swirl as always and we would leave Raiko and bathe
together, play there, eat in private and love without
haste. And when I realized the truth, with Hana
gone forever, my entrails and brain crawled with
spawning worms, I almost vomited. "Raiko,
got to know who three clients were."
  "So sorry, Furansu-san, I said before:
her mama-san is dead, people of house scattered,
Inn of Forty-seven Ronin dead."
  "There must be some way to find th--"'
  "None. So sorry."
  "Then tell me the truth ... the truth, of
how she died."
  "With your knife in her throat, so sorry."
  "She did it? Hara-kiri?"'
  Raiko had answered with the same patient
voice, the same voice that had told the same
story and given the same answer to the same questions a
dozen times before: "Hara-kiri is the ancient
way, honorable way, the only way atone a
wrong. Hana betrayed you and us, owners,
patrons and herself--that was her karma in this life.
There is nothing more say. So sorry, let her
rest. Her fortieth day after her death day, her
kami day when a person is reborn or becomes
a kami has passed now. Let her kami, her
spirit, rest. So sorry, not speak of her again.
Now, what other thing can I do for you?"'
  Angelique was sitting straight in her chair
as she had been taught from childhood, disquieted,
watching him, one hand in her lap, the other fanned
against the flies. Twice she had said, "What do
you mean, yes and no?"' but he had not heard her,
seemingly in a trance. Just before she had left
Paris, her uncle had been the same and her
aunt had said, "leave him be, who knows what
devils inhabit a man's mind when troubled."
  "What trouble is he in, Aunt-mama?"'
  "Ah, ch@erie, all life is a trouble
when what you earn won't pay for what is needed.
Taxes crush us, Paris is a cess pit of
greed and without morals, France is rumbling again,
the franc buys less every month, bread
has doubled in half a year. Leave him be,
poor man, he does his best."
  Angelique sighed. Yes, poor man. Tomorrow
I will do my best and talk to Malcolm, he will
arrange to pay his debts. Such a good man should not
be in Debtor's Prison. What can his debts
amount to? A few louis ...
  She saw Andr`e come back into himself and look
at her. "Yes and no, Andr`e? What does that
mean?"
  "Yes they have such a medicine, but no you cannot have
it yet because y--"
  "But why, why ha--"
  "Mon Dieu, be patient, then I can
tell you what the mama-san told me. You can not
have it yet because it cannot be taken until the thirtieth
day, then again on the thirty-fifth day, and also because
the drink--an infusion of herbs--must be prepared
freshly each time."
  His words had ripped the simplicity of her
plan apart: Andr`e was to have given her now the drink
or powder that he had obtained last night, she would
take it at once and go to bed saying she had the
vapors. Voil@a! A small stomachache and
in a few hours, a day at the most and everything
perfect.
  For a moment she felt her whole world twisting but
again managed to put on the brakes: Stop it!
You're alone. You are the heroine whom the forces of
evil have ensnared. You must be strong, you have to fight
alone and you-can-beat-them! "Thirty days?" She
sounded strangled.
  "Yes, and you repeat it on the thirty-fifth.
You must be accurate and th--"
  "And what happens then, Andr`e? Is it fast,
what?"
  "For God's sake let me finish. She said
it's, it usually works at once. The second
draft isn't always necessary."
  "There's nothing I can take immediately?"
  "No. There isn't anything like that."
  "But this other, she said it's successful every time?"
  "Yes." Raiko's answer to his same question
had been, "Nine times in ten. If the medicine
does not work, there are other ways."
  "You mean a doctor?"'
  "Yes. The medicine usually works but is
expensive. I must pay medicine maker before he
will give it to me. He must buy herbs, do you
understand ..."
  Andr`e concentrated on Angelique again. "The
mama-san said it was effective--but expensive."
  "Effective? Every time? And not dangerous?"
  "Every time and not dangerous. But expensive. She
has to pay the apothecary in advance, he has
to obtain fresh herbs."
  "Oh," she said airily, "then please pay
her for me, and shortly I will repay you three
times."
  His lips went into a thin line. "I've already
advanced twenty louis. I'm not a rich man."
  "But what can a little medicine cost, Andr`e, such
an ordinary medicine? It can't be expensive
surely?"
  "She said, for such a girl wanting such help,
secret help, what does the cost matter?"
  "I agree, dear Andr`e." Angelique
brushed this problem aside with warmth and friendliness,
her heart hardening against him for being so mercenary.
"In thirty days I can pay whatever it is out
of the allowance Malcolm has promised, and
anyway I'm sure, I know you'll be able
to arrange it, a good, wise man like you. Thank
you, my dear friend. Please tell her it is
exactly eight days from when I should have had my
period. When do you get the medicine?"
  "I already told you, the day before the thirtieth
day. We can collect it or send someone for it the
day before."
  "And the, the discomfort? How long will that be?"
  Andr`e was feeling very tired, uncomfortable and now
furious that he had allowed himself to become
embroiled, however many the potential, permanent
advantages. "She told me it depends on the
girl, her age, if this has been done before. If
it hasn't it should be easy."
  "But how many days of sickness will there be?"
  "Mon Dieu, she didn't say and I
didn't ask her. I didn't ask her. If you
have specific questions write them down and I'll
try to get you the answers. Now if you'll
excuse me ..." He got up. Instantly she
allowed her eyes to fill with tears. "Oh
Andr`e, thank you, I'm so sorry, you're so
kind to help me and I'm sorry to upset you,"
she sobbed and was pleased to see him melt at
once.
  "Don't cry, Angelique, I'm not
upset with you, it's not your fault, it's ... I
apologize, it must be terrible for you but
please don't worry, I'll fetch the medicine
on time and help all I can, just write down the
questions and in the next few days I'll have the
answers for you. Sorry, it's ... I've not
been feeling well recently ..."
  She had pretended to comfort him and, after he had
left, she weighed what he had told her,
looking out through the flyspecked curtains to High
Street, seeing nothing.
  Thirty days? Never mind. I can live with the
delay, nothing will show, she was thinking over and over,
wanting to convince herself. Twenty-two more days
won't matter.
  To make sure she took out her diary,
unlocked it and began counting. Then she re-counted
and reached the same day. November 7th.
Friday. The saint day of Saint Theodore.
Who is he? I'll light candles to him every
Sunday. No need to mark the day, she thought with a
shiver. Nonetheless, she put a small cross in
the corner. What about confession?
  God understands. HE understands everything.
  I can wait--but what if.
  What if it doesn't work or Andr`e gets
sick or lost or killed, or the mama-san
fails me, or any one of a thousand reasons?
  This gnawed at her. It obliterated her
resolve. Real tears wet her cheeks. Then,
suddenly, she remembered what her father had once
said, years upon years ago, just before he had
deserted her and her little brother, in Paris ...
  "Yes he deserted us," she said out loud, the
first time she had ever articulated that truth. "He
did. Mon Dieu, from what I know now,
probably that's just as well. He would have sold
us, certainly sold me long since."
  Her father had quoted his idol, Napoleon
Bonaparte: "A wise general always has a line
of retreat planned, from which to launch the hammer
blow of victory."
  What is my line of retreat?
  Then something Andr`e Poncin had said weeks
ago slid into her mind. She smiled, all her
care vanishing.

  Phillip Tyrer was putting the final touches
to the draft of Sir William's reply to the
roju in his best copper plate writing.
Unlike all previous communications, Sir
William was sending the original in
English and a copy in Dutch which Johann had
been told to prepare.
  "There, Johann, I'm done." He finished
the tail of the B of Sir William
Aylesbury, K.c.b. with an intricate
twirl.
  "Scheiss in mein Hut!" Johann
beamed. "That's the best writing I've ever seen.
No wonder Wee Willie wants you to copy
all his London dispatches."
  "Shigata ga nai!" Tyrer said without
thinking. It doesn't matter.
  "You're really working at it, the Japanese,
eh?"
  "Yes, yes I am, and between us, for God's
sake don't tell Willie, enjoy it
immensely. What do you think of his ploy?"
  Johann sighed. "With Jappos I don't
think. Me, I think Jappo mealy-mouthing has
scrambled his head."
  The message read:

To His Excellency, Nori Anjo,
Esq., Chief roju. I have your dispatch of
yesterday and inform you it is rejected entirely.
If you do not pay the agreed installment of the
indemnity for the murder of two British soldiers
on time, the amount owing will be quadrupled for every day
of delay.
  I am sorry to learn you are clearly not
masters of your own calender. I will correct this for
you at once. I will leave for Ky@oto on my
flagship with an escorting squadron, twelve
days from today, docking at Osaka. Then, with a
mounted escort and obligatory sixty-pound
cannon of our mounted Royal Artillery for
royal salutes, I and the other Ministers will
proceed at once to Ky@oto to seek redress
for you from His young Majesty, Sh@ogun Nobusada
personally or, if he is not available, from His
Imperial Highness, Emperor Komei
personally, promising full royal honours with a
twenty-one-cannon salute. Please inform them
of our impending arrival. (signed) Her
Britannic Majesty's Minister and
Ambassador, Sir William Aylesbury,
K.c.b. ...

  "Emperor? What Emperor?" Johann said
disgustedly. "There's only the Midako,
Mikado, some name like that, and he's only a kind
of minor pope without power, not like Pius the Ninth,
who meddles and connives and plays politics and,
like all Gottverdampt Catholics, wants
us back on the stake!"
  "Come now, Johann, they're not all bad.
Now English Catholics can vote and even stand for
Parliament like anyone who's eligible."
  "The pox on Catholics. I'm Swiss and
we don't forget."
  "Then why are the Pope's personal guards
all Swiss?"
  "They're Catholic mercenaries." Johann
shrugged. "Give me the rough copy of the dispatch and
I'll get to work."
  "Sir Willie says you're not renewing your
contract."
  "It's time to move on and leave the field
to younger and wiser." Johann beamed suddenly.
"Y."
  "That's not funny. Please send Nakama
in, I think he's in the garden."
  "Don't trust that bastard. Best watch him,
Phillip."
  Tyrer wondered what Johann would say if
he knew the real truth about him.
  Hiraga opened the door. "Hai,
Taira-san?"
  "Ikimasho, Nakama-sensei, old chap,
hai?" Let's go, all right? Tyrer said,
beaming, still marvelling at the change.
  When Hiraga had arrived at dawn this
morning, gone were the dirt and rags and most of all
the samurai haircut--his short hair now
similar to that of almost any commoner. In his neat,
starched but ordinary kimono, new sun hat
hanging by its thong on his back, new tabi and
thongs, he was like the son of a prosperous merchant.
  "My God, you look terrific,
Nakama," he had burst out, "that haircut
suits you."
  "Ah Taira-san," Hiraga had said
hesitantly, with pretended humility, following
the ploy he and Ori had formulated. "I think
what you say me, he'rp me give up
samurai, stop be samurai. Soon go back
Choshu, become farmer 'rike grandfather, or in
beer or sak`e factory."
  "Give up samurai? Is that possible?"'
  "Hai. Possib're. P'rease
not want say more, yes?"'
  "All right. But it's a wise decision,
congratulations."
  Involuntarily Hiraga ran his hand over his
head, the close shorn sides and newness itching.
"Soon hair grows, Taira-san, same
yours."
  "Why not?"' Tyrer wore his hair,
naturally wavy, almost to his shoulders. Unlike
most he was fastidious about its cleanliness: a
pettipoint had hung over his bed forever, stitched
by his mother, Cleanliness is next
to Godliness. "How are your bruises?"'
  "I forgotten them."
  "I have forgotten them."
  "Ah, thank you, I have forgotten them. Some
good newses, Taira-san." Elaborately,
Hiraga had told him about going to the Yoshiwara
and arranging Fujiko for tonight. "She yours, o'rr
night. Good, neh?"'
  For a moment Tyrer had been speechless.
Impulsively he wrung Hiraga's hand.
"Thank you. My dear friend, thank you." He
had sat back and pulled out his pipe and offered
tobacco to Hiraga who refused, hard put not
to laugh. "That's marvelous," Tyrer's mind
had jumped him ahead to their tryst, his heart
throbbing and manhood conscious. "My God,
marvelous!"
  With an effort he had put all those immediate,
erotic thoughts aside to concentrate on the day's
schedule. "Have you arranged somewhere to stay in the
village?"'
  "Yes. P'rease we go now, yes?"'
  During their walk to the Japanese quarter,
always careful to keep their voices down and not speak
English near any passerby, Tyrer had continued
to probe Hiraga, mining diamonds, amongst them
the names of the Sh@ogun and Emperor. At the
dwelling of the shoya, he had inspected the shop and
tiny drab room off it where Hiraga was
supposed to be staying. Then he had brought him
back to the Legation, completely pleased and
reassured. "Did you notice on the street
how you were hardly noticed, even by the soldiers,
now that you don't look like a samurai?"'
  "Yes. Taira-san. You can he'rp me,
p'rease?"'
  "Anything, what?"'
  "I 'rike try to wear your clothes,
become more 'rike gai-jin, yes?"'
  "Great idea!"
  When they got back to the Legation, Tyrer
hurried to see Sir William, excitedly had
given him the names of the Sh@ogun and Emperor.
"I thought you would want to know at once, sir.
Also another piece of info: I think I've
understood correctly but he says all
Japanese, even daimyos have to get permission
to visit Ky@oto, where the Emperor lives."
  "What are daimyos?"'
  "That's what they call their kings, sir. But
everyone, even them, they must get permission
to visit Ky@oto--he says the Bakufu which is
another name for the Sh@ogunate, like their Civil
Service, are afraid to allow free access
there, to anyone." He had tried to keep calm but
the words rushed out of him. "If that's true, and
if the Sh@ogun's there at present and the
Emperor's there permanently and if all power's
there--if you were to go there, sir, wouldn't that bypass
the Bakufu?"'
  "An inspired leap of logic," Sir
William said kindly with a sigh of pleasure,
already there, long before Tyrer had explained.
"Phillip, I think I will redraft the
dispatch. Come back in an hour--you've done very
well."
  "Thank you sir." Then he had told him
about the "new" Nakama and new haircut.
"My thought is that if we could persuade him
into European clothes he would become more and more
malleable--of course as he teaches me
Japanese while I'm teaching him English."
  "Very good idea, Phillip."
  "Thank you, sir, I'll arrange it
instantly. I can have the bill sent to our shroff for
payment?"'
  Some of Sir William's good humor
vanished. "We have no excess funds,
Phillip, and the Exchequer ... Very well. But
one outfit only. You're responsible the
bill's modest."
  Tyrer had left hastily and now that he had
finished his work on the dispatch, he was going to take
Hiraga to the Chinese tailor down the road.
  High Street was not crowded at this time of the day,
midafternoon, most men in their countinghouses, or at
siesta, or at the Club. A few drunks
huddled in the lee of the wharfs, the wind still
gusting. Later a football match had been
arranged, Navy versus Army on their parade
ground, and Tyrer was looking forward to it, but not to the
meeting with Jamie McFay he had had to agree
to, after the tailor's. "He's head of
Struan's here, Nakama-san, somehow he'd
found out about you, and that you can speak some English.
He's to be trusted."
  "So ka? Struan? The man who is
to marry?"
  "Oh, the servants told you about the engagement
party? No, McFay's just their head merchant.
Mr. Struan, the tai-pan, is the one who's
going to be married. That's his building, warehouse,
offices and living quarters."
  "So ka?" Hiraga studied it.
Difficult to attack or get into, he thought.
Barred lower windows. "This Struan, also his
woman, they stay there?"
  Tyrer's mind leapt to Fujiko and he said
absently, "Struan does, I'm not sure about
her. In London, this building would be nothing
compared to ordinary houses, thousands upon thousands.
London's the richest city in the world."
  "Richer than Yedo?"
  Tyrer laughed. "Richer than twenty, fifty
Yedos, how do I say that in Japanese?"
  Hiraga told him, his sharp eyes taking in
everything--disbelieving about London and most of what
Tyrer was telling him as lies to confuse him.
  Now they were passing the various bungalows that
served as Legations, picking their way through the
rubbish that was strewn everywhere. "Why different
f'rags, p'rease?"
  Tyrer wanted to practice speaking
Japanese, but every time he started, Hiraga would
answer in English and at once ask another question.
Even so he explained, pointing them out: "They're
Legations: that's the Russian, the American,
over there's the French--that one's Prussian.
Prussia's an important nation on the
Continent. If I wanted to say th--"
  "Ah, so sorry, you have map of your wor'rd,
p'rease?"
  "Oh yes, I'd be glad to show it to you."
  A detachment of soldiers approached and marched
past, paying them no attention. "These men of
Prush'ah," Hiraga pronounced the word
carefully, "they also war against French?"
  "Sometimes. They're certainly
warlike, always battling someone. They've just got
a new King and his chief supporter is a big
tough prince called Bismarck who's trying
to collect all German speakers into one great
nation and--"
  "P'rease, so sorry, Taira-san, not so
fast yes?"
  "Ah gomen nasai." Tyrer repeated
what he had said but more slowly, answering more questions,
never failing to be astounded at their number and
extent and range of his prot@eg`e's enquiring
mind. He laughed again. "We must have an
agreement, one hour about my world in English, one
hour about yours in English, and then a one-hour
conversation in Japanese. Hai?"
  "Hai. Domo."
  Four horsemen going out to the racetrack
overtook them, greeted Tyrer and looked
Hiraga over curiously. Tyrer greeted them
back. At the far end of High Street by the
barrier, lines of coolies with the afternoon's shipment of
goods and foods began to clear through the Custom
House under the watchful eye of the samurai
guards. "We'd best hurry, don't want
to get mixed up with that lot," he said and crossed
the road, picking his way through the horse manure,
then stopped abruptly and waved. They had been
passing the French Legation. Angelique was standing
at her ground floor window, the curtains pulled
aside. She smiled and waved back. Hiraga
pretended not to have noticed her scrutiny.
  "That's the lady Mr. Struan's going
to marry," Tyrer said, walking on again.
"Beautiful, isn't she?"
  "Hai. That her house, yes?"
  "Yes."

  "Good night, Mr. McFay. Everything's
locked up."
  "Thanks. 'night, Vargas." McFay
stifled a yawn, continued writing his daily
journal, the last job of the day. His desk was
clear but for two weeks of newspapers still to be
read, his In tray empty, Out tray spilling
over with answers to most of today's mail, and
orders, bills of lading already completed and
signed, ready for collection at sunup when
business began.
  Vargas absently scratched at a flea
bite, a way of life in Asia, and
put the key to the strong room on the desk. "Shall
I bring you more light?"
  "No thanks, I'm almost finished. See you
tomorrow."
  "The Choshus are due tomorrow, about the guns."
  "Yes, I hadn't forgotten, good night."
  Now that he was alone in this part of the ground floor
McFay felt happier, always pleased to be on
his own and always safe within himself. Except for
Vargas, all clerks, shroffs and other staff had
their own staircase and rooms far to the back of the
godown. The communicating door between the two
sections was locked nightly. Only Ah Tok
and their personal servants stayed in this foresection
that contained offices, the strong room where all
guns, ledgers, safes with all specie in
Mexican silver dollars, gold taels and
Japanese coin were kept, and their living quarters
on the floor above.
  Mail day was always busy and a late night, tonight
later than most because the moment he had got the last
installment of Great Expectations from
Nettlesmith, he had rushed upstairs and shared
his allotted hour, page by relished page with
Malcolm Struan, then had come down again
delighted and satisfied that all had worked out for
Pip and the girl and that a new Dickens epic would
be announced in next month's edition.
  The grandfather clock was ticking pleasantly.
He wrote rapidly with a fine clear hand:

MS was enraged with his mother's letter in today's mail
(Steamship Swift Wind, a day late, one
man lost overboard in storm off Shanghai, also
she had to run the gauntlet in the Shimonoseki
Straits, the shore batteries firing perhaps
twenty rounds, without hurt, thank God!). My
reply to my Mrs. S's cannonade today was
honeyed (she has not yet heard about the party that will
cause an explosion from Hong Kong to Java) but
doubt if it will smooth any waters.
  I informed her that A had moved over to the
French Legation but don't think that will mean a
damn to Mrs. S, though MS was fretful all
day that A hadn't visited him and again swore at
Ah Tok, putting her in a filthy mood--which
she passed on to all the other servants,
ayeeyah!
  I must record in spite of all his pain that
MS is much wiser than I imagined,
with an excellent grasp of business generally,
international trade and now accepts my view that
there is great potential here. We discussed the
Brock problem and agreed there was nothing to be done
from here but as soon as he returned to HK, he
would deal with them. Again he refused to consider
returning on the mail ship--Hoag fence sits
and is not my ally, saying the longer Malcolm
rests here, the better--a bad voyage could be
traumatic.
  Had a first meeting with this Japanese
Nakama (that has to be an alias) who is
certainly more than he pretends to be. A
samurai, a ronin outlaw, who can speak some
English, who would cut his hair because he has
decided to give up his samurai status, who
seeks to wear our clothes, has to be out of the
ordinary, and watched carefully. If half of
what he says is true, then we have made--through
Tyrer, bless him--a major intelligence step
forward. Pity that Nakama knows nothing about
business, his only usable information was that Osaka
is Japan's main business center, not Yedo, so
all the more reason to press for the opening of that city as
soon as possible. Nakama is certainly to be
cultivated and ...

  There was a tap on one of the shutters. He
glanced at the clock, almost ten. An hour
late. Never mind, Asian time's different to our
time.
  Without haste he got up, slipped the small
revolver into the side pocket of his frock
coat, went to his private door and unlocked
it. Outside were two women muffled in hooded
cloaks, with a man servant. They all bowed.
He beckoned the women in, gave a few coins
to the man who thanked him, bowed again and went back
down the side alley towards the Yoshiwara.
  McFay re-locked the door. "Heya,
Nemi, you all same pretty, neh?" He
smiled and hugged one of them.
  The girl beamed at him from under her hood, a
sparkle to her, his musume for a year and kept
by him for half that time. "Heya, Jami-san,
you-ah gud, heya? This musume my sister,
Shizuka. Pretti, neh?"
  Nervously the other girl moved her hood
aside, forced a smile. He began to breathe again
--Shizuka was as young as Nemi, as
attractive and fragrant. "Hai!" he said,
and both were relieved that she had passed initial
scrutiny. This was the first time McFay had ever
arranged a girl for someone else. Awkwardly,
he had asked Nemi to make sure the mama-san
understood the girl was for the tai-pan and therefore had
to be special. Both girls were in their early
twenties, barely coming up to his shoulder, both more
at ease now though completely aware the real
hurdle had yet to be surmounted.
  "Shizuka, I please you see. Tai-pan
top man," he said kindly, then to Nemi,
patting his side where Struan's wound was, "She
understand about wound, neh?"
  Nemi nodded, her white teeth sparkling.
"Hai, I 'sp'rain, Jami-san! Dozo,
'reave coat here, or up'stair?"
  "Upstairs."
  He led the way up the great staircase, well
lit with oil lamps, Nemi chattering to the new
girl who was all eyes. It was his custom, from time
to time, to send for Nemi to spend the night here, the
manservant returning just before dawn to escort her
back to the little dwelling he had bought for her within the
grounds of her house, the Inn of Succulent
Joy. Ten gold sovereigns it had cost him
for a five-year lease for the house after days of
haggling. Another ten for her contract for the same
period, plus extra for a new kimono each
month, hairdressing, a personal maid, and
all found, with sak`e.
  "But Mama-san, what if fire burn
house down, heya?"' he had asked, appalled
that he was agreeing to such a huge price though the
extraordinarily advantageous exchange rate
gave them a profit of four hundred percent most
months--meant that almost everyone could keep a pony
or two, consume champagne at will, and more
importantly guaranteed that Nemi's running
expenses would not amount to more than a few pounds
yearly.
  The mama-san was shocked. "Bui'd 'rike
new. You pay ha'f price, fair, neh?"'
  Nemi, present at the final negotiation, had
laughed. "P'renti fire in house,
Jami-san, p'renti jig jig, neh?"'
  When McFay reached the top of the stairs he
gave her another happy hug for no reason,
other than she had proved to be worth every farthing,
giving him so much pleasure and so much
peace. On the landing was a large high-back
chair. Nemi took off her cloak and hood,
telling the other girl to do likewise, leaving them
there. Neat and pretty kimonos underneath, hair
well coiffured--chrysalis into butterfly.
Pleased with himself he knocked on the door.
  "Come in."
  Malcolm Struan sat in his chair, a
cheroot smoldering between his fingers, elegant in his
dressing gown but ill at ease. "Hello,
Jamie."
  "Evening, tai-pan." Both girls bowed with
great deference, McFay quite unaware that almost
everything about Malcolm Struan--as well as himself
and most gai-jin--was common knowledge and the subject of
constant and avid Yoshiwara gossip, his
enormous wealth, that he had recently become
tai-pan, the circumstances of his wound and now
impending marriage. "This's Shizuka, she'll
stay with you. The servant'll arrive just before dawn,
everything as I told you. I'll knock first. She
may be a bit shy but, well, no problem.
This's my musume, Nemi. I, er, I
thought it best, the first time, to bring her along to make
things easier."
  Both girls bowed again. "Heya,
Tai-pan," Nemi said in complete control,
delighted to meet him and confident with her choice,
"Shizuka sister my, good musume, heya!"
She nodded vigorously and gave Shizuka a little
push. The girl went over to him, hesitantly,
knelt and bowed again.
  "I'll be in my rooms if you need me."
  "Thanks, Jamie."
  McFay closed the door quietly, went
further down the corridor. His suite was tidy,
masculine and comfortable. Three rooms, sitting
room, bedroom, spare bedroom, all with
fireplaces, and a bathroom. On the sideboard
were cold cuts, fresh bread and her favorite,
a freshly baked apple pie, the apples
imported from Shanghai. Sak`e in a container of
hot water, and Loch Vey whisky from Struan's
own distillery that she adored.
  The moment the door was bolted she stood on
tiptoe and kissed him hungrily. "No see
six day, first bed-u then ba'f!" she said,
reversing the usual order. His heart picked up
a beat though he was in no hurry.
  She took him by the hand, led him into the
bedroom and half pushed him onto the bed, knelt
to pull off his boots and began to undress him,
all the time chattering in her half-comprehensible
pidgin, telling him that the Yoshiwara was a buzz
with business, the Floating World prosperous, not
to worry about Shizuka, she was expensive but the
best, and what was this they hear about war and please we
do not want war, just business, and I have a new
kimono with lucky carp all over it that was,
well, a little expensive, "but ichiban,
Jami-san, you-ah 'rike veri. Bed-u!"
  Obediently he got into the four-poster. The
night was perfect, neither hot nor cool. She
untied her obi, let the kimono fall, then her
under-kimono and slip. Quite naked, completely
without guilt or shame about nudity like all
musume--one of the many characteristics that set them
apart, and one that McFay and all gai-jin found so
astounding and enviable--she took the pins from her
hair, shook it and let it fall to her waist and
marched triumphantly to the bathroom and the first
delight of the evening.
  She sat on the toilet and reached up for the
handle to the chain of the water closet and pulled. The
water roared down into the porcelain bowl and, as
always, she clapped her hands with glee.
  The first time she had seen it she had not believed
it. "Where wat'er go?"' she asked
suspiciously. He had explained and drawn
pictures but she still would not believe him until
he had shown her the pipes and taken her into the
garden where the manhole cover of the septic tank
was--all pipes, water tanks, boilers,
toilet bowls, hand basins, sinks, taps and the
three baths imported from England, Hong Kong and
Shanghai where many pieces were beginning to be
manufactured for the vast Indian and Asian
markets.
  She had begged him to allow her to show her friends.
Proudly he had agreed because this was the first such
installation in all Japan, to Sir William's
chagrin and Norbert Greyforth's fury, and now the
pattern of the dozen or so working and nonworking
copies, though not all with hot and cold water:
nothing but the best and most modern, therefore
British, for Struan's.
  So guided tours of the privileged few
to examine the Jami-san cleansing room became
one of the most sought-after sights of gai-jin
Yokohama, the chattering musume like so
many exotic birds, bowing and sucking in their
breaths and pulling the chain to gasps of wonder and
applause.
  Nemi washed her hands. With a contented sigh, she
slipped under the sheets beside him.

  Phillip Tyrer was spent and almost asleep.
Fujiko bore his weight comfortably, then began
to ease away.
  "Iy`e, matsu," No, don't move
... wait, he murmured.
  "I just want to fetch a towel,
Taira-san. Towel, do you understand?"
  "Ah, ah yes. Understand towel. You stay
I get ..."
  "Oh no, I would lose face, it is my
duty. Let me go, please ... now do not be
difficult or naughty."
  She chuckled as he nuzzled her and held on
but she was deft and knew her craft well and
waited. Now the small room was peaceful.
Outside the night was fair. Wind rustled the
trees and bushes. A few drafts from around the
sliding windows, not yet cold or unpleasant.
Flickering oil lamp.
  In a moment she slid away without disturbing his
tranquility and went to the little bathroom with its
high wooden tub, filled to the brim with hot
water, which was on a wooden grill to allow the
water to flow away when the bung was pulled out.
Scented soap and chamber pot and fresh towels.
Quickly she used a damp towel and dried herself.
  When she came back she brought a hot towel,
sponged him then dried him. All the while his
eyes were tightly closed and he was near moaning with
pleasure, at the same time embarrassed that she was
doing it for him, not he for her. "Ah,
Fujiko-chan, you are wonderful."
  "No, it is my pleasure," she said,
long over her wonder and embarrassment at the
strange habits of the foreigners: that they rarely
bathed, were usually consumed with shame and guilt over
pillow pleasures, were astoundingly possessive and
usually furious that she had other clients--
stupid, what were they but clients?--or turning
away, blushing, when she was undressing for their
enjoyment, or covering themselves when only half
naked, preferring to fornicate in the dark when
everyone knew much of the thrill was to see, examine
and observe, or were embarrassed purple
when she attempted normal variations to prevent
boredom and to prolong and increase Moments with the
gods--the time of the Clouds and the Rain.
  No, gai-jin aren't like us. They almost always
favor First Position with Urgency, occasionally
Baiting the Hen or Cherry Blossom Time, so
allowing me no opportunity to demonstrate my
skills, or when, in the light, I would position
myself to play with the One-Eyed Monk the many games
of uplifting such as Near and Far, Over the
Dragon, Springtime Planting, Stealing the
Honey that even the most unpracticed youth would
require and appreciate, a gai-jin would jerk
away, firmly but gently pull me up
alongside him, kiss my neck, hold tight and
mumble incomprehensibles.
  She murmured, "Now I'll massage you
to sleep."
  "Don't understand. Mess'erge?"
  "Massage, Taira-san. Like this."
  "Ah now I understand. Massage, thank
you."
  Her fingers were gentle and wonderful and he
drifted away, hardly believing his luck, proud
of his performance and that she had ecstatically finished
three times at least to his once--and never mind that
Raiko had said that tomorrow Fujiko had to visit her
village, near Yedo, to see her sick grandfather,
"... but only for a few days,
Taira-san."
  "Oh, so sorry, Raiko-san. Please,
how many day 'way?"
  "How many days will she be away. Only
three."
  "Ah thank you. How many days will she be
away?" Tyrer repeated--he had asked her and
Fujiko, always to correct him.
  Three days. That will give me time to recover.
My God, that was the best. Wonder what will
happen when the roju get our dispatch. I'm
sure my advice's correct and that Nakama
is telling the truth--God, I've a lot
to thank him for, Sir William was positively
beaming and as for Fujiko ...
  Lulled by her touch, his mind began a jumble of
Nakama and her and being in Japan and everything so
different and learning Japanese, incessant words
and phrases leaping forward untidily. The
futons were hard and difficult to get used to but he
was comfortable, lying on his stomach, enjoying
her nearness. God but I'm tired. Can't stand the
idea of "other clients," he thought. Got
to make her mine, just mine. Tomorrow I'll ask
Andr`e to help me.
  Without turning he reached back, put his hand on
her thigh. Lovely silky skin.
  Where was I? Oh yes, the roju. We'll
give the buggers what-for. Bloody awful about the
mail ship being fired on--we've just got to make
Shimonoseki safe and if the bloody Bakufu
won't do it that means taking out those batteries
ourselves. Must remember to be careful about that with
Nakama, mustn't forget he's from Choshu too.
Could I use him as a go-between? And if the roju
won't deal with those Satsuma devils we'll have
to crush them ourselves. The bloody effrontery of the
daimyo saying that he can't find Canterbury's
murderers, the bastards came out of his own ranks
for God's sake, I saw them hack off
Canterbury's arm and the blood sprayed ...
  Her fingers froze. "What's the matter,
Taira-san?"
  Before he knew it he was hugging her, wanting
to block out the Tokaid@o, and then, when the
trembling had stopped he lay back, pulling her
with him and held on to her, the warm pliant length
of her against him, loving her, so thankful to be with
her, waiting for the bad to return to its recess.
  She lay quiet, also waiting, not thinking about
him except that once more gai-jin proved to be
curious indeed, beyond understanding. It was comfortable resting
against him and she was glad that the first explosion had
been achieved properly, that the client was
satisfied, so she could safely believe she had
earned her extra fee.
  When Raiko was assigning all their
appointments this morning, the mama-san had told
her she was putting up her rate: "with Taira,
only, because you will have extra work. Remember he
could a big fish for you, Fujiko, a long-term
patron much better than Kant-er-bury-san
if we're careful and if you please him. Frenchy
tells me he's an important official so
strive hard to please him. Only speak
Japanese, no pidgin, become a teacher,
encourage him, and remember he is
ridiculously shy and knows nothing and never mention
Kant-er-bury. We will pretend you have to go away
for a few days--but do not worry, I have two
clients for you tomorrow, in the afternoon a
gai-jin, a civilized person at night.
..."
  With a generous patron for a year or two I could
quickly pay off my debts, and life would be much
better than having to take whatever client was
available, she thought, then contentedly abandoned the
present as she always tried to do when with a client,
projecting herself into the future where she lived
happily with her rich farmer husband and four or
five sons. She could see their farmhouse amid
their many rice fields, abundant with green
shoots of winter or spring plantings, promising
another rich harvest, her mother-in-law kind and
pleased with her, a bullock or two tethered to a
plow, flowers in the little garden and ...
  "Ah, Fujiko. Thank you, you are
wonderful!"
  She nestled closer and said how strong and manly
he was.
  "What?" he asked sleepily. One of her
hands answered intimately and he twisted.
"No, Fujiko, please, first sleep. No
... please later ..."
  "Ah, but a strong man like you ..." she
murmured, hid her boredom, and continued
dutifully.

  Ori yawned and took his eye away from the spy
hole. "I've seen enough," he whispered.
"Shocking."
  "I agree." Hiraga kept his voice down
too. "Terrible. Fujiko's performance was the
worst I've ever seen. Baka!"
  "If I was Taira I would demand my money
back."
  "I agree. Baka! She won't have him
ready for hours and as for him ... only First
Position once and talk about urgency! Ten
thrusts and poof, Over the Moon like a duck."
  Ori had to hold his hand over his mouth to stop the
laughter then, carefully, he stuck little pieces
of paper to cover the holes they had made in the far
corner of the shoji screen. Together they slipped
away into the bushes, through the secret gate in the
fence, and thence to Ori's dwelling.
  "Sak`e!"
  Half asleep the maid set the tray in
front of them, poured and shuffled away, still finding
it difficult not to stare at their heads. They
toasted each other and refilled the cups,
the room small and pleasant, candle-lit, with bed
futons already made up in the adjoining room.
Swords were on low, lacquer racks--Raiko
had bent the Yoshiwara rule forbidding weapons within
the walls because they were shishi, because of Hiraga's
portrait and because both had swore by sonno-joi
not use the weapons against anyone in the house, or
any guest, and only in defense.
  "I cannot believe Taira was taken in by her
faked Moment with the Gods, Hiraga, one after
another like that! Her acting was terrible. Is he that
stupid?"
  "Obviously." Hiraga laughed and rubbed the
back and sides of his head vigorously.
"Eeee, with that sized weapon he should have really
made her squeal--are all gai-jin built like
that?"
  "Who cares--in his case it is wasted."
  "No finesse, Ori! Perhaps I should get him
a pillow book like a virgin bride, eh?"
  "Better we kill him and them and fire the
Settlement."
  "Be patient, we will, there is plenty of
time."
  "He is a perfect target, it is another
perfect opportunity," Ori said, an edge
creeping into his voice.
  Hiraga watched him, all warmth gone of a
sudden. "Yes but not now, he's too
important."
  "You said yourself if we could infuriate them enough
they'd bombard Yedo and that would be wonderful for our
cause."
  "Yes, you are right but we have time." Hiraga
showed none of his concern, appeasing him, wanting him
controlled. "Taira is answering all my questions.
For instance, no one told us gai-jin fight each
other like wild dogs, worse than daimyos before
Toranaga--the Dutch hid that from us, eh?"
  "They are all liars and barbarians."
  "Yes but there must be hundreds of bits of
information like that, that will unlock the way to play them,
and dominate them. We must learn everything, Ori,
and then, when we're part of the new Bakufu we will
set German against Russian against Frenchman
against Ing'erish against American ..."
  Hiraga shivered remembering the little Tyrer had
told him about that civil war, the battles and
casualties, all the modern weapons and
hundreds of thousands of armed men
involved, and the unbelievable vastness of the gai-jin
lands. "This evening he said the Inger'ish Navy
rules the world oceans, that by their law is twice as
big as the next two navies combined, with
hundreds of men-o'-war, thousands of cannon."
  "Lies. Exaggeration to frighten you. He and all
of them want us cowed, you as much as any. He
wants our secrets too!"
  "I only give him only what I think he
should know." Hiraga belched irritably.
"Ori, we've got to learn about them! These dogs
have conquered most of the world--humbled China and burned
Peking, and this year the French became overlords of
Cochin-China and are set to colonize
Cambodia."
  "Yes but the French played native prince
against native prince like the British in India.
This is Japan. We're different--this is the
Land of the Gods. With all the cannon in the world
they will never conquer us." Ori's face twisted
strangely. "Even if they seduce some
daimyos to their side, even then, the rest of us will
slaughter them."
  "Not without cannon and knowledge."
  "Without cannon, yes, Hiraga-san."
  Hiraga shrugged and poured for both of them. There
were many shishi who shared Ori's zeal--and had
forgotten Sun-tzu: Know your enemy as you know
yourself and you will win a hundred battles. "I
hope you are right, meanwhile I will find out as much
as I can. Tomorrow he promised to let me look at
a map of the world--he called it an
"at'ras.""
  "How do you know it will not be false, made up?"
  "That is not likely, not falsifying one. Perhaps
I could even get a copy, we could have it
translated--and some of their school books."
Hiraga's excitement picked up. "Taira
said they have new skills in counting, taught in
ordinary schools, and astronomy measurers
called 'rong-tit-tude, 'ra-tit-ude,"
Hiraga pronounced the English words with
difficulty, "that somehow guide them with fantastic
accuracy on the oceans, a thousand ri from land.
Baka that I know so little! Baka that I cannot
read English!"
  "You will," Ori said, "I never will. You will be
part of our new government--I never will."
  "Why say that?"
  "I worship sonno-joi, I have
already thought of my death poem, and spoken it. I
told it to Shorin, the night of the attack.
Baka that he got himself killed too soon."
Ori drained his cup and poured the last drops and
ordered a new flask. He looked at
Hiraga narrowly. "I heard your Lord Ogama
will pardon any Choshu shishi who publicly
forswears sonno-joi."
  Hiraga nodded. "My father wrote to me about
that. It means nothing to us--to Choshu shishi."
  "There is a rumor that Ogama controls the
Gates, excluding everyone else--even that there's
new fighting between his troops and Satsumas."
  "Many daimyos are misguided, from time to time,"
Hiraga said levelly, not liking the way the
conversation was going, noticing that, in his cups, Ori
was ever more quarrelsome. Tonight Raiko had again warned
him that Ori was a smoking volcano. "We all
agreed long ago not to be bound by the deeds or
misdeeds of our hereditary leaders."
  "If Ogama holds the Gates he could
give back power to the Emperor and make
sonno-joi a fact."
  "Perhaps he will, perhaps he has already."
  Ori drained the cup. "I will be glad to leave
Yokohama. Poison is in the air. Better
you come to Ky@oto with me. This nest of liars may
infect you."
  "You will be safer on the road to Ky@oto without
me. Even without my hair I could be
recognized."
  A sudden gust tugged at the roof thatch and
rattled a half-opened shutter. They glanced at
it momentarily, then went back to drinking. The
sak`e had loosened them but had not dispelled the
undercurrents, thoughts of death and the net tightening
around them, or of the planned ambush on Sh@ogun
Nobusada, of Shorin and Sumomo, and most of
all, what about the gai-jin girl? Hiraga
had not yet mentioned her nor had Ori yet asked
about her but both were waiting, both circling this
central issue, both impatient and still
undecided.
  Ori broke the silence. "When Akimoto
arrives tomorrow how much are you going to tell him?"
  "Everything we know. He will travel to Ky@oto
with you."
  "No, better he stays, you will need a fighter
here."
  "Why?"
  Again Ori shrugged. "Two is better than
one. Now," he said it flat, "tell me where she
is."
  Hiraga described the place. Exactly.
"There were no bars on the windows or side door
I could see." All day he had been wondering
what to do about Ori--if Ori broke in to the
house and killed her, whether he lived or died,
the whole Settlement would be in uproar and their
venom would first turn on every Japanese within reach.
"I agree she is a correct target for
sonno-joi but not yet, not while I am
accepted by them and learning so many of their secrets."
  "Such a perfect target should be dealt with at
once, Katsumata said to hesitate is
to lose. We can get those secrets out of
books."
  "I have already said: I do not agree."
  "At the same time I kill her we fire the
Yoshiwara and thus the Settlement, the three of
us, and retreat in the confusion. We do it two days
from now."
  "No."
  "I say yes! Two or three days, no
more!"
  Hiraga thought about that, and Ori, very carefully.
Icily. Then again he decided:
"It-is-forbidden."
  The finality of the words washed over Ori. For the
second time in as few days. Both times over
her.
  No sound in the room now. Both impassive.
Outside they could hear the wind. It had dropped
a little. From time to time it crackled the shoji's
oiled paper. Ori sipped, seething,
implacably committed but showing none of it, knowing that
if both his arms were as strong as before and he was as
agile as before, he would be readying to dive for his
sword to fend off the attack that, unless he
surrendered, was inevitable.
  Never mind. In a direct fight, even if
I was totally fit, Hiraga would always beat me
to the first cut. Therefore he must be removed from my
path in another way.
  With a will to match the new enemy who was determined
to thwart him, Ori vowed he would not be the first
to break the silence and so lose face. Pressure
between them soared. In seconds it became
unbearable, now cresting ...
  Running footsteps. The shoji slid
back. Raiko was chalky. "Bakufu Enforcer
patrols are on the bridge and at the Gate.
You must leave. Hurry!"
  Both were aghast, all else forgotten. They
went for their swords. "Will they come into the
Yoshiwara?" Ori asked.
  "Yes, in twos and threes, they have before,
avoiding gai-jin but not us." Her voice trembled
like her hands.
  "Is there a safe way out through the paddy?"
  "Everywhere and nowhere, Ori," Hiraga said for
her, having examined that as a possible escape
route yesterday. "The land's flat with no cover
for a ri. If they're blocking the gate and the
bridge they'll be there too."
  "What about the gai-jin area, Raiko?"
  "The Settlement? They're never gone there. You
mus--" She whirled, even more frightened. Both men
jerked their swords half out, while a
white-faced maid rushed up. "They are in the
lane making a house-to-house search," she
whimpered.
  "Warn the others."
  The girl fled. Hiraga tried to get his
brain working. "Raiko, where is your safe
place, your secret cellar?"
  "We have none," she said wringing her hands.
  "There must be one somewhere."
  Abruptly Ori snaked over to her and she
backed off, terrified. "Where's the secret way
into the Settlement? Quick!"
  Raiko almost fainted as he shifted his grip
on his sword hilt and though not actually menaced,
she knew she was near death. "I ... into the
Settlement? I, I'm not sure but, but years
ago I was, was told ... I'd forgotten,"
she said trembling, "I'm not sure but, but please
follow quietly."
  They stayed close to her, going deep in the
bushes, careless of the branches that fought to prevent
their passage, the moon still good and high between skudding
clouds, the wind tugging at them. When she reached a
hidden part of the fence between her Inn and the next, she
pressed a knot in the wood. A section creaked
open, the wooden hinges grimed and unused.
  Without disturbing the carousers, she crossed this
garden to the far side, through a gate into another
garden and around the back, past the low, bricked,
fireproof structure that served as a safe for
valuables, to where the large water tanks,
or wells were--the tanks part filled
by rainwater, part by daily lines of water
coolies.
  Panting, she motioned at the wooden cover over
a well. "I think, I think it is there."
  Hiraga eased the cover aside. Crude,
rusty iron bars as foot and handholds were
hammered into the mud brick walls, no sign of
water below. Still frightened she whispered, "I was
told it leads to a tunnel ... I am not sure
but I was told it goes under the canal but where it
comes out I do not know. I had forgotten about it ...
I must get back ..."
  "Wait!" Ori stepped in her way, picked
up a stone and dropped it into the well. A loud
plop as it hit water far below. "Who made this?"
  "Bakufu, I was told, when they built the
Settlement."
  "Who told you about it?"
  "One of the man servants--I forget who, but
he had seen them ..." They all looked over
towards the main street. Angry voices there.
"I have to get back ..." She vanished the way
she had come.
  Uneasily they peered below. "If the Bakufu
built it, Ori, it could be a trap, for people like
us."
  From one of the nearby houses the sound of voices
cursing in English: "What the hell d'you want
... push off!"
  Ori stuck his long sword in his belt.
Awkwardly because of his shoulder, he slid over the
lip and began to descend. Hiraga followed,
replacing the cover.
  The blackness seemed ever more black, then
Ori's feet hit earth again. "Careful, I
think it is a ledge." His voice was strangled and
echoed eerily.
  Hiraga groped down beside him. In his sleeve
pocket were some safety matches and he scraped
one alight.
  "Eeee," Ori said excitedly, "where did you
get that?"
  "They have them everywhere in the Legation--those dogs
are so rich they just leave them around. Taira said
to help myself. Look there!" In the last of the match
they saw the mouth of the tunnel. It was dry and the
height of a man. Water filled the well ten
feet below them. In a niche was an old candle.
It took Hiraga three matches
to light it. "Come on."
  The tunnel sloped downwards. After fifty
paces or so it became wet, the floor puddled
and awash in parts. Fetid water seeped down from
the roughly shored roof and sides, the wood rotting
and unsafe. As they went onwards the air became
more rancid, breathing difficult. "We can wait
here, Ori."
  "No, go on."
  They were sweating, in part from fear, in part from the
closeness. The flame guttered and went out.
Cursing Hiraga lit it and cupped the flame,
not much of the wick left or of the candle. He waded
onwards, the water level rising. Still the roof
sloped downwards, now the water to their hips.
Ori slipped but regained his footing. Another
twenty or thirty paces. Water still rising.
Now to their waists, the roof not far above their heads.
Onwards. Candle weakening. On again.
  Hiraga was watching the candle, cursing.
"Better we go back and wait in the dry part."
  "No, go on until the candle goes out."
  Ahead the tunnel curled into the blackness, the
roof lowering to not far above the water. Nauseated
Hiraga waded forward again, the bottom
slippery. More paces. The roof pressed against his
head. More, and now the roof rose slightly.
"Water level is going down," he said, sick
with relief, wading faster, the murk stinking. Around
the bend, roof higher now. Onwards. Just before the
candle spluttered and died they saw dry earth and the
tunnel end, a shaft leading up, another down.
  Hiraga groped forward, unable to see anything.
"Ori, now I am at the edge. Listen, I will
toss a stone down into it." The stone took
seconds and seconds ricocheting before it plopped
dully. "Eeee, it must go down a hundred
feet or more," he said, his stomach heaving.
  "Light another match."
  "I have only three left." Hiraga lit
one. They could see rusty, precarious
footholds leading upwards, nothing more. "How
did you know Raiko knew about this?"
  "It was a sudden thought. There had to be a
tunnel--I would have built one if I had been
them." Ori's voice was hoarse, heavy breathing.
"They could be up there, in ambush. They will shove us
back, or we will have to jump."
  "Yes."
  "Hurry up, I hate it here.
Climb!"
  Equally uncomfortable, Hiraga eased his long
sword in his belt. Ori backed nervously,
gripping his sword hilt. Abruptly the two
men faced each other, near safety perhaps, but
nothing solved between them.
  The match guttered and went out.
  In the blackness they could no longer see each
other. Without thinking each had at once retreated
against the tunnel wall away from the lip.
Hiraga, more battle cunning, dropping to one
knee, his hand on his hilt ready to slash the legs
from under Ori if he attacked, listening intently
for a sword sliding from its sheath.
  "Hiraga!" Ori's voice rasped out of the
black, well out of range, further away down
the tunnel. "I want her dead, I will go after
her--for sonno-joi and me. You want to stay.
Solve the problem."
  Silently Hiraga stood. "You solve it,"
he hissed and at once, soundlessly, changed
positions.
  "I cannot. I cannot solve it, I have tried."
  Hiraga hesitated, expecting a trick.
"First put your swords down."
  "And then?"
  "Next: because she obsesses you above
sonno-joi, you will not be armed near me in
Yokohama, you will leave for Ky@oto tomorrow and
tell Katsumata, he is your Satsuma
leader. When you return we will do it, everything as you
said."
  "And if I do not return?"
  "Then I will do it--in a time of my choosing."
  The voice grated even more. "But she could
leave, escape, neh? What if she leaves
before I return?"
  "I will make sure I hear about any move and
will send you word. If you cannot be here in time, I will
decide. She--and her husband if by then they're
married--they will only go to Hong Kong. You--or
we--can follow her there." He heard Ori's
heavy breathing and waited, on guard against a sudden
rush, knowing he could not trust Ori while she was
alive and near but this seemed to be the best plan
for the moment. Killing him would be a waste. I need
his wisdom. "You agree?"
  He waited. And waited. Then, "Yes.
What else?"
  "Last: the cross, you will throw it down
the well." Hiraga heard sudden, angry
intake of breath. The silence grew.
  "I agree, Hiraga-san. Please accept
my apologies."
  Then his sharp ears heard the slight sound of
cloth being moved, something went past him and then the
tiny sound of metal hitting the well wall behind
him, almost immediately to vanish below. Sound of swords
being grounded.
  Hiraga lit a match. Indeed now Ori was
standing defenseless. At once Hiraga darted
forward, Ori rushed back in panic but Hiraga
only collected the swords. Before the match died
he had had time to throw the swords also into the well.
"Please obey me, Ori. Then you have nothing
to fear. I will go first, wait till I call down
to you."
  The rungs were jagged with rust, some loose. The
ascent was precarious. Then, far above,
thankfully he saw the mouth of the well open to the
sky, speckles of stars between clouds. Night
sounds, wind and sea. Climbing again but more
cautiously. It took all of his strength to ease
himself up to the stone balustrade and peer around.
  The abandoned well was near the canal fence, in
a wasteland of weeds and derelict junk.
Seashore not far off. Broken-down houses,
deep potholes in the dirt roadways. Snarl
of a foraging dog nearby. Raucous voices singing
on the wind. Now Hiraga had his bearings. They
were in Drunk Town.

                 

    Friday, 17th October:
  In the morning light in Yedo Castle,
Misamoto--the fisherman, fake samurai, and
Yoshi's spy--was trembling on his knees in
front of the alarmed Council of Elders, the
English version of Sir William's reply
shaking in his hand. Beside him cowered a Bakufu
official.
  "Speak up, fisherman!" Anjo, the chief
Elder repeated, the audience room hushed and
tense and chill. "Never mind if you don't understand
all the Ing'erish words, we want to know if has
the Bakufu official translated the message
accurately? Is that what the gai-jin message
says? Exactly?"
  "It's, well, yes, more or less,
yes, Sire," Misamoto mumbled, so frightened
he could hardly speak. "It's as the lord
Official ... more or less, Sire ... more
... or ..."
  "Have you seaweed for a tongue, fish offal for
brains? Hurry up! Lord Toranaga says you
can read Ing'erish--read!" An hour ago Anjo
had been awakened by the unnerved Bakufu
official who had brought Sir William's
reply in Dutch and English. Hastily Anjo
had convened a meeting of the Council where the
official had just repeated his translation of the
Dutch. "What does the paper say in
Ing'erish?"
  "Well, Sire, yes, it's, er ..." Again
Misamoto's voice died away, once more
choked with panic.
  Exasperated Anjo looked at Yoshi. "This
fish head is your spy," he said with just the right
amount of ice. "It was your idea to fetch him,
please make him speak up."
  "Tell us what the letter says, Misamoto,"
Yoshi said kindly, inwardly almost blind with
frustration and anger. "No one is going to hurt
you. In your own words. The truth."
  "Well, Sire, it's more or less as ... more
or less as the lord Official said, Sire,"
Misamoto stuttered, "but this's, this letter's, I
don't know all the words, Sire, but some of them
... well, well ..." His face was twisted with
fear.
  Yoshi waited a moment. "Go on,
Misamoto, don't be afraid, speak the
truth, whatever it is. No one will touch you. We
need the truth."
  "Well, Sire, the gai-jin leader,"
Misamoto stammered, "He says he's going
to Osaka in eleven days as the Official said, but
not, not to make a, a "Ceremonial visit"
..." He quailed under the strength of their eyes,
so terrified that now his nose was running and saliva
dribbled his chin, then he blurted out, "He's not
at all happy in fact he's strongly angry
and he's going ... going to Osaka with his fleet,
going in force to Ky@oto with cannon,
sixty-pounders, and cavalry and soldiers to see
the Son of Heaven and the Lord Sh@ogun--he's
even named them, Sire, Emperor Komei and the
boy Sh@ogun, Nobusada."
  Everyone gasped, even the guards--
normally impassive and not supposed to be
listening. Misamoto shoved his head to the tatami
and kept it there.
  Yoshi pointed at the Bakufu official who
blanched as all attention focused on him. "Is
that correct?"
  "Ceremonial visit, Sire? For your
august ears that should be the correct translation
... the barbarian wording is rude and uncouth and
should, I sincerely believe, be correctly
construed as a Ceremonial, State visit,
an--"
  "Does it say with "cannon and cavalry"
and such?"
  "In principle, Sire, the lett--"
  To everyone's shock, Yoshi almost shouted,
"Yes or no?"
  The Official swallowed, aghast that he was
ordered to answer so directly, the first time in his
life, and appalled that he was being challenged and
ordinary rules and manners and the niceties of
diplomacy were being disregarded. "I regret
to inform you that in principle, it does mention those but
such an impertinence is clearly a mistake
and--"
  "Why did you not translate accurately?"
  "For august ears, Sire, it is necessary
to interpret--"
  "Are those august persons named? Yes or
no?"
  "Their names are contained but y--"
  "Are the characters of their names the correct ones?"
  "It would seem, sire the characters appear to be
c--"
  "Write an exact translation of what it
says at once." The raw words were said softly but
the violence ricocheted off the unadorned stone
walls. "Exact! Make all future
communications from them, or to them, equally exact.
EXACT! One mistake and your head will be on a
rubbish dump. Get out! Misamoto, you did very
well, please wait outside."
  The two men fled, Misamoto cursing his ill
luck and the day he had agreed to accompany Perry
to Japan, believing the Bakufu would welcome
him for his unique knowledge, would grant him a fortune--
the Official swearing to be revenged on Yoshi and
this lying fisherman before the Council made good the
sentence that he, a wise and correct official,
could not avoid.
  Yoshi broke the silence, his mind working
frantically to formulate the next move in the never
ending conflict. "We cannot possibly allow an
armed visit to Ky@oto! This proves what I have
been saying all along: we must have English
speakers, translators we can trust--who will
tell us what their foul messages really say!"
  "That is not necessary," Toyama grated, his heavy
dewlaps shaking with fury. "This gai-jin
impertinence is insulting beyond belief, tantamount
to a declaration of war. Such impertinence must be
answered in blood." A rustle went through the
guards. "It is a declaration of war. Good. In
three or four days I will lead the surprise
attack on the Settlement and finish this nonsense
once and for all."
  "That would be baka. We dare not. Baka!"
Anjo repeated, more for the guards than anyone,
easy for one to be a secret shishi admirer or
sonno-joi adherent. "How many times must I
say no attack yet, not even a surprise
attack."
  Toyama had flushed even more. "Yoshi-san,"
he said, "we could smash them and burn
Yokohama, neh? We could, neh? I cannot
bear the shame, it's too much!"
  "You are right, of course we could destroy
Yokohama, easily, but Anjo-dono is
correct--we cannot get at their fleet. I
suggest we continue as before," Yoshi said calmly,
not feeling calm at all, "we supply them with
watered soup and no fish: we offer them a meeting
with the Council of Elders in thirty days, allowing
ourselves to be negotiated down to eight days,
delay that as long as we can."
  "I will only meet those dogs on a
battlefield."
  Yoshi curbed his temper. "I'm sure you will
do what the roju decides, but I propose you
are represented by an imposter at this meeting:
Misamoto."
  "Eh?" They all stared at him.
  "He'll be a perfect substitute."
  Anjo said, "That stupid fisherman will never
b--"
  "Dressed in ceremonial clothes, taught
to wear them, eight days is enough time. He looks like
a samurai now though he does not act like one.
Fortunately he is not stupid and so frightened that
he will do whatever we order, and most
important, he will tell the truth which is in
short supply." Yoshi saw Anjo redden. The
others pretended not to notice.
  "What then, Yoshi-san?"
  "Next, we'll hold the meeting here in the
castle."
  "Out of the question!" Anjo said.
  "Of course we first offer Kanagawa,"
Yoshi told him irritably, "then allow ourselves
to agree to meet them here."
  "Out of the question," Anjo said again to the agreement
of the others.
  "With the castle as bait we can delay again, perhaps
even another month--their curiosity will consume them
--and we only allow them into the outer area. Why not
the castle? All the gai-jin leaders of their own
free will within our grasp? We could take them
hostage, their presence gives us a dozen chances
to entwine them further."
  They gaped at him, off balance. "Take them
hostage?"
  "A possibility, one of many," Yoshi said
patiently, knowing he needed allies in the coming
struggle. "We must use guile and silken
threads and their own weakness against them, not war--
until we can equalize their fleets."
  "Until then?" Adachi spluttered. The
rotund little man was the richest of them all and his
Toranaga blood line equal to Yoshi's.
"You really believe we have to deal with these dogs
until we have fleets to match theirs?"
  "Or enough big cannon to keep them off our
shores. We only need a sack or two of
gold and they will trample over themselves to sell us the
means to blow them out of our water." Yoshi's brow
darkened. "I heard a rumor that some Choshu
emissaries are already trying to buy rifles from
them."
  "Those dogs!" Toyama spat with rage.
"Always Choshu. The sooner we put them down the
better."
  "And Satsuma," Anjo muttered to general
agreement and looked at Yoshi. "And others!"
  Yoshi pretended not to understand what his adversary
implied. Never mind, he thought, the day is coming.
"We can deal with all enemies, one at a time--not
together."
  Toyama said gruffly, "I vote we order
all friendly daimyos to increase taxes at once
and arm. I begin tomorrow."
  ""Advise" is a better word," Adachi
said carefully, and drained his teacup. Delicate
flowers decorated the lacquered trays that had
been set in front of all of them. He stifled
a yawn, bored and anxious to go back to bed.
"Please go on with your plan, Yoshi-dono,
until we know all the details, how can we
vote on it?"
  "The morning of the meeting Anjo-sama will
unfortunately be taken ill, oh so sorry. As
the whole roju is not present, we will be unable
to make any binding decisions, but we will listen and
try to reach a compromise. If we cannot
compromise then we will, with suitable deference,
agree to "submit their desires to the full
Council as soon as possible"--and delay and
delay to drive them mad so they make a
mistake, not us."
  "Why should they agree to another delay?"
Anjo asked, glad that he would not have to be nose
to nose with gai-jin, distrusting Yoshi, and wondering
where the trick was.
  "The dogs have proved they would rather talk than
fight, they are cowards," Yoshi was saying.
"Though they could easily dominate us, it is
clear they don't have the stomach for it."
  "What if they do not agree and this insolent
Inger'ish ape makes good his threat and leaves for
Ky@oto? What then? We cannot allow that, under
any circumstances!"
  "I agree," Yoshi said with great finality and
everyone tensed. "That means war--a war we must
eventually lose."
  Toyama said instantly, "Better to war as men
than become slaves like the Chinese, Indians and
all other barbarian tribes." The old man
peered at Yoshi. "If they land you'll vote for
war?"
  "Instantly! Any attempt to land in force--
anywhere--will be prevented."
  "Good. Then I hope they land," Toyama
said, satisfied.
  "War would be very bad. I think they will talk and
we can maneuver them out of this madness." Yoshi's
voice became harsher. "We can if we are clever
enough. Meanwhile we must concentrate on more
important matters: like Ky@oto and taking
back control of our Gates, like the hostile
daimyos, like getting enough gold to buy weapons and
modernize and equip our forces--and those
of our trusted allies--and not allow Choshu,
Tosa and Satsuma to arm under the guise of
supporting us, merely to more quickly attack us."
  "The traitor Ogama should be outlawed,"
Toyama said. "Why don't we outlaw him and
take back our Gates?"
  "To attack him now would be baka!" Anjo
told him sourly. "It would only push
Satsuma and Tosa into his arms, along with other
fence sitters." He shifted uncomfortably, his
stomach hurting him, head hurting, and no relief
from the new Chinese doctor he had consulted in
secret about his constant pains. "We settle it
this way: Yoshi-dono, please draft a reply
to the gai-jin for approval at tomorrow's meeting."
  "Certainly. But what I want to know is who
is feeding our secrets to them. Who is the
gai-jin spy? This is the first time they've mentioned
the "young" Sh@ogun and named him, and named the
Emperor. Someone is betraying us."
  "We will put all our spies on to it! Good.
And we will meet tomorrow morning as usual, consider the
draft of our reply and decide on your plan."
Anjo's eyes slitted. "And to make final
preparations for Sh@ogun Nobusada's departure
to Ky@oto."
  The blood went out of Yoshi's face. "We
have discussed this a dozen times. At our last
meet--"
  "His visit will go forward! He will travel
by the north road, not the Tokaid@o, along the
coast. Safer."
  "As Guardian I oppose the visit for the
reasons already stated over and over--by any road!"
  Toyama said, "Better for my son to be in
Ky@oto. Soon we will be at war. Our
warriors won't be checked much longer."
  "No war and no visit. Either will destroy us,"
Yoshi said angrily. "The moment a Sh@ogun
kowtows, as Nobusada will, our position is
ruined for all time. The Legacy states th--"
  Anjo said, "The Legacy will not dominate in
this."
  "The Toranaga Legacy is our only
anchor and cannot b--"
  "I do not agree!"
  Choking back his rage, Yoshi began to get
up but stopped as Anjo said, "There is a last
matter to decide today: the immediate appointment of the
new Elder, Utani's replacement."
  There was a sudden tension amongst them. Since
Utani's assassination and the manner of his death--the
room in which he and the youth had been impaled had not
been completely destroyed in the fire--together with the
failure of legions of spies and soldiers
to apprehend the assassins, all the Elders had
slept less comfortably. Particularly Anjo
who was still smarting from his own near assassination.
Except for Yoshi who was occasionally supported
by Utani, none of the others regretted his death,
or the manner of it, least of all Anjo who had
been shocked to discover the identity of the paramour and
loathed Utani even more for secretly stealing his
occasional pleasure. "Let us vote now."
  "Such an important matter should wait
until tomorrow."
  "So sorry, Yoshi-sama. Now is a
perfect time."
  Adachi nodded. "Unless the Council is at
full strength we cannot take important
decisions. Who do you propose?"
  "I formally propose Zukumura of Gai."
  In spite of his control Yoshi gasped--the
daimyo was simple-minded, a kinsman and open
ally of Anjo. "I have already stated my
disapproval of him--there are a dozen better than
him," he said at once. "We agreed on Gen
Taira."
  "I did not agree." Anjo smiled with his
mouth only. "I merely said I would consider him
carefully. I have. Zukumura is a better
choice. Now we will vote."
  "I do not think a vote now is wise or
adv--"
  "Vote! As chief Councillor it is my
right to put it to a vote! Vote!"
  "I vote No!" Yoshi said and glared at the
other two.
  Adachi did not meet his eye, just said, "Gai
have been Mito's allies since Sekigahara.
Yes."
  Toyama shrugged. "Whatever you want."

  Yoshi slashed violently at his two
opponents with the wooden sword, sweat pouring off
his face, then darted back, spun and attacked
again. Both men, experts, sidestepped and
pressed their own attack, on orders to be
victors, with failure costing them a month confined
to barracks and three months pay.
  Cleverly, one man feinted to give the other an
opening but Yoshi was ready and ducked under the blow and
caught the man across the chest and his sword shattered
with the strength of his blow--if the blade had been
real it would have almost cut the man in two--
eliminating him from the contest.
  At once the other rushed in confidently for the
kill but Yoshi was no longer where he had
expected but almost floor level and hacking forward
with a karate foot chop. This man groaned in
agony as the iron-hard edge of Yoshi's foot
crashed into his scrotum and he fell writhing.
Still enwrapped in his rage and adrenaline, Yoshi
leaped at the prone man, the splintered haft of his
sword ready on high, a stake to drive into the
man's throat for the death blow. But he stayed the
blow a hair above the man's neck, heart
pumping, ecstatic with his skill and control and that
he had not failed this time, victory meaning nothing.
His pent-up fury was no more.
  Content now, he tossed the broken haft
aside and began to unwind, the exercise room
bare and Spartan like the rest of the castle. All were
panting from their exertions, the prone man still twisting
and turning with pain. Then Yoshi was astonished
to hear gentle clapping. Angrily he turned--
by his custom, no one was ever invited to witness these
practice sessions where the extent of his prowess
could be gauged, his weaknesses could be judged, and his
brutality measured--but this anger vanished also.
  "Hosaki! When did you arrive?" he said,
trying to regain his breath. "Why not send a
messenger to tell me you were coming?" His smile
vanished. "Trouble?"
  "No, Sire," his wife said so happily,
kneeling beside the door. "No trouble, just an
abundance of pleasure to see you." She bowed
deeply, her riding skirt and jacket,
serviceable heavy green silk, modest and
travel marked, like the padded matching overmantle
and wide hat tied under her chin and short sword in
her obi. "Please excuse me for slipping in like
this, uninvited, and not changing first but, well, I
could not wait to see you--and now I am even more
pleased I did for now I know that you are a better
swordsman than ever."
  He pretended not to be delighted, then went
closer and looked at her searchingly. "Really no
trouble?"
  "Yes, Sire." She beamed, her
adoration open. White teeth and ebony slanted
eyes in a classic face that was neither
attractive nor ordinary but not to be forgotten,
her whole presence was one of great dignity.
"Yoshi," his father had said nine years ago when
he was seventeen, "I have chosen your wife for you.
Her blood line is Toranaga, equal to yours
though from the minor branch of Mitowara. Her name
is Hosaki, meaning an "ear of wheat" in the
ancient tongue, a harbinger of abundance and
fertility, and also a "spear head." I do not think
she will fail you in either capacity. ..."
  Nor has she, Yoshi thought proudly. Already
two fine sons and a daughter, and she's still strong,
always wise, a firm manager of our finances--and,
rare in a wife, pleasant enough to pillow occasionally
though with none of the fire of my consort or
pleasure partners, particularly Koiko.
  He accepted a dry towel from the man who was
unhurt, and waved his hand in dismissal. The man
bowed silently and helped the other, still in agony,
to limp out.
  He knelt near her, towelling the sweat
away. "So?"
  "It's not safe here, neh?" she said softly.
  "Nowhere is safe."
  "First," she said in a normal voice, "first
Yoshi-chan, we will look after your body: a
bath, massage and then talk."
  "Good. There is much to talk about here."
  "Yes." Smiling she got up, and again at his
searching look reassured him, "Truly at
Dragon's Tooth all is well, your sons
healthy, your consort and her son happy, your
captains and retainers alert and well armed--
everything as you would want. I just decided to make a
short visit, on a sudden whim," she said for the
listening ears, "I merely needed to see you, and
to talk about castle management."
  And also to bed you, my beauty, she was thinking in
her secret heart, looking up at him, her
nostrils filled with his masculine smell,
conscious of his nearness and as always aching for his
strength.
  While you are away, Yoshi-chan, I can
keep calm, most of the time, but near you? Ah then
that is very hard though I pretend, oh how I
pretend, and hide my jealousy of the others and
behave like a perfect wife. But that does not mean
that I, like all wives, do not feel
jealousy violently, sometimes to a point of
madness, wishing to kill or even better
to mutilate the others, wanting to be desired and
bedded with an equal passion.
  "You've been away too long, husband," she
said gently, wanting him to take her now, on the
floor, to rut like she imagined young peasants would
rut.

  It was near midday with a kind wind that broomed the
sky. They were within his innermost sanctum, a
suite of three tatami rooms and bathing room
off a corner battlement. She was pouring tea for
him, elegantly as always. Since a child she had
studied the tea ceremony, as he had, but now she
was a Sensei, a teacher of tea in her own right.
Both had bathed and had been massaged. Doors
were barred, guards posted and maids dismissed. He
wore a starched kimono, she a flowing sleeping
kimono, her hair loosed. "After our talk I
think I will rest. Then my head will be clear for this
evening."
  "You rode all the way?"
  "Yes, Sire." The journey had been rough
in fact, little sleep and changing horses every three
ri, about nine miles.
  "How long did it take you?"
  "Two and a half days, I just brought twenty
retainers under the command of Captain Ishimoto."
She laughed. "I certainly needed the massage,
and the bath. But first--"
  "Almost ten ri a day? Why the forced march?"
  "Mostly for my pleasure," she said lightly,
knowing there was time enough for bad news. "But first,
Yoshi-chan, tea for your pleasure."
  "Thank you." He drank the fine green tea
from the Ming gourd and set it down again, watching and
waiting, swept up in her mastery and
tranquility.
  After she had poured again and sipped and set her
own cup down she said softly, "I decided to come
here without delay because I had heard disquieting
rumors and needed to reassure myself and your
captains that you were well--rumors that you were in
danger, that Anjo was padding the Council against you,
that the shishi attempt on him and Utani's
assassination were all part of a major escalation of
sonno-joi, that war is coming, within and from without, and
that Anjo is further betraying you, and all the
Sh@ogunate. He must be insane
to allow the Sh@ogun and his Imperial wife to go
to Ky@oto to kowtow."
  "All true or partially true," he said,
equally quietly, and her face tumbled. "Bad
news travels with the wings of a hawk, Hosaki,
neh? It's worse because of the gai-jin." Then he
told her about his meeting with the foreigners and
Misamoto, the spy, then in more detail about the
castle intrigues--but not about Koiko's
suspected connection to the shishi: Hosaki would
never understand how exciting she is and how much more
exciting this knowledge makes her, he thought. My wife
would only advise Koiko's immediate dismissal,
investigation and punishment and give me no peace
until it was done. He finished by telling her about
the alien fleet at their doors, Sir
William's letter and threat, and today's meeting.
  "Zukumura? An Elder? That senile fish
head? Isn't one of his sons married to a niece
of Anjo's? Surely old Toyama didn't
vote for him?"
  "He just shrugged and said, "Him or another, it
means nothing, we will be warring soon. Have who you
want.""
  "Then at best it will be three to two against you."
  "Yes. Now there is no curb on Anjo.
He can do what he wants, vote himself increased
powers, make himself tair@o, whatever stupidity
he wants, such as Nobusada's stupid trek
to Ky@oto." Yoshi felt another tightness in his
chest but put it away, glad to be able to talk
openly--as much as he could ever be open, trusting her
more than he could trust anyone.
  "The barbarians were as you imagined them,
Sire?" she asked. Everything about them fascinated
her: "know your enemy as you know yourself ..."
Sun-tzu had been the prime learning book for
her and her four sisters and three brothers, along
with martial arts, calligraphy and the tea
ceremony. She and her sisters also had concentrated
teaching by their mother and aunts on land and financial
management, together with practical methods of
dealing with men of all classes, and the
all-important future. She had never
excelled at martial arts though she could use a
knife, and war fan well enough.
  Everything Yoshi could remember, he told her,
and also what Misamoto had said about gai-jin in the
part of the Americas called California--and
sometimes called the Land of the Golden
Mountain. Her eyes narrowed but he did not
notice.
  When he had finished she still had a thousand questions but
contained them for later, not wanting to tire him. "You
help me to picture everything, Yoshi-chan, you
are a wonderful observer. What have you decided?"
  "Nothing yet--I wish my father was alive, I
miss his counsel--and Mother's."
  "Yes," she said, glad that both were dead, the
father two years ago, mostly of old age
aggravated by his close confinement by Ii--he was
fifty-five--the mother in last year's smallpox
epidemic. Both had made her life miserable,
at the same time keeping Yoshi in thrall, in her
opinion the father not doing his duty to the family,
making bad decisions more times than not, and the mother
forever being the most ill-tempered, difficult
to please mother-in-law in her ken, worse to her
than the wives of his three brothers.
  The only clever thing they did in their whole
lives, she thought, was to agree to my father's
proposal of marriage to Toranaga Yoshi.
For that I thank them. Now I rule Dragon's
Tooth, and our lands, and they will be passed on to my
sons strong, inviolate and worthy of the Lord
Sh@ogun Toranaga.
  "Yes," she said. "So sorry they are gone.
I bow to their shrine every day and beg to be worthy of
their trust."
  He sighed. Since his mother's death he had
felt in a void, more so than with his father whom he
admired, but feared. Whenever he had a problem,
or was afraid, he always knew he could go to her and
be soothed, guided and given new strength. He
said sadly, "Karma that Mother died so young."
  "Yes Sire," she said, understanding his sadness,
and perfectly content for, of course, it would be the
same with all sons whose first duty is obey and
to cherish their mother above everyone--all their lives.
I can never fill that void any more than the wives
of my sons will fill mine.
  "What's your advice, Hosaki?"
  "I've too many thoughts for these too many
problems," she told him worriedly, her mind
grappling with the mosaic of danger from every quarter.
"I feel useless. Let me think carefully,
tonight and tomorrow--perhaps I can suggest something that will give
you a clue to what you must do, then, with your permission
I'll return home the next day, one thing for
certain: to further strengthen our
defenses. You must tell me what to do.
Meanwhile a few immediate observations for you
to consider: increase the vigilance of your guards, and
quietly mobilize--all your forces."
  "I had already decided that."
  "This gai-jin who accosted you after the meeting, a
Frenchman you say, I suggest you take
advantage of the offer to see the inside of a warship
with your own eyes, very important for you to see for
yourself--perhaps even pretend to become friendly with them,
then perhaps you could play them against the English,
neh?"
  "I had already decided to do that."
  She smiled to herself, and lowered her voice even
more. "However difficult, the sooner the better,
Anjo must be removed permanently. As it is
now probable you cannot prevent the Sh@ogun and the
Princess from leaving for Ky@oto--I agree she
is, correctly from her point of view, the
Court spy and puppet and your enemy--then you must
leave secretly just after them and rush to Ky@oto
by the shorter Tokaid@o and be there before them ... you
smile, Sire?"
  "Only because you please me. And when I get
to Ky@oto?"
  "You must become the Emperor's confidant--we
have friends in Court who will assist you. Then, one
possibility of dozens: make a secret
agreement with Ogama of Choshu to leave him in
control of the Gates ..." she hesitated as
Yoshi flushed, "but only as long as he is
openly allied with you against Satsuma and Tosa."
  "Ogama would never believe I would keep that
bargain nor would I, but we must get back our
Gates whatever the cost."
  "I agree. But say the final part of your
pact is that if he agrees to join forces for a
surprise attack on Lord Sanjiro of
Satsuma at a time of your choosing. When
Sanjiro is overcome, Ogama gives you
back the Gates and he gets Satsuma in
return."
  Yoshi frowned even more. "Very difficult
to conquer Sanjiro by land when he is skulking behind
his mountains--even Sh@ogun Toranaga did not
attack Satsuma after Sekigahara, just
accepted their public bows, oaths of fidelity,
and curbed them with kindness. We cannot launch a
sea-born attack." He thought a moment. "That
is a dream, not a real possibility.
Too difficult," he muttered. "But then, who
knows? Next."
  She dropped her voice. "Remove
Nobusada on his way to Ky@oto--it is a
chance in a lifetime."
  "Never!" he said, openly shocked and inwardly
aghast that she thought as he did or, even worse,
had read his most secret heart. "That would betray
the Legacy, my heritage, everything that Lord
Sh@ogun Toranaga strived for, I have accepted
him as liege lord as I am bound to do."
  "Of course you are right," she said at once
soothingly, already bowing low, prepared and expecting
that reaction but needing to articulate it for him. "That
was baka of me. I completely agree. So
sorr--"
  "Good! Never think or say that again."
  "Of course. Please forgive me." She
kept her head bowed for the correct time, muttering
apologies, then leaned forward and refilled his
cup and sat back again, eyes downcast, waiting
to be asked to continue. Nobusada should have been
removed by your father, Yoshi, she was thinking calmly
--I am astonished that you never realized it. Your
father, and mother--who should have given him correct
counsel--failed in their duty when that stupid boy
was proposed against you as Sh@ogun by the traitor
Ii. Ii shoved us all into house arrest,
destroyed our peace for years, almost caused the
death of our eldest son because of the months we were so
closely confined that we all starved. We all
knew Ii would do it long before it happened.
Removing Nobusada has always been so
obvious, however heretical and distasteful an
action, but the only real way to protect our
future. If you will not consider it, Yoshi, I will
find a way ...
  "That was a bad thought, Hosaki. Terrible!"
  "I agree, Sire. Please accept my
humble apologies." Again her head touched the
tatami. "It was stupid. I do not know where such
stupidity comes from. You are right of course. Perhaps
it was because I am overwrought with the dangers surrounding
you. Please, Sire, will you allow me to leave?"
  "In a moment, yes, meanwhile--" A little
mollified he motioned for her to pour more tea, still
off balance that she would dare to speak such
sacrilege openly, even to him.
  "May I mention one other thought, Sire, before
I go?"
  "Yes, provided it's not stupid like the last
one."
  She almost laughed out loud at the petulant,
little boy barb that did not enter even her outmost
defenses. "You said, Sire, so wisely, that the
most important and immediate gai-jin riddle
to solve is how to sink their fleets or to keep
their cannon away from our shores, neh?"
  "Yes."
  "Could cannon be mounted on barges?"
  "Eh?" He frowned, deflected from
Nobusada by this new tack. "I'd imagine so,
why?"
  "We could find out from the Dutch, they would help
us. Perhaps we could build a defensive fleet,
no matter how cumbersome, and anchor the barges
offshore, as far out to sea as we can in strategic
approaches to our important areas, like the
Shimonoseki Straits, along with fortifying the
mouths to all our harbors--fortunately they are very
few, neh?"
  "It might be possible," he conceded, the idea
not having occurred to him. "But I don't have enough
money or gold to buy all the cannon necessary for
our shore batteries, let alone to build such a
fleet. Or enough time or knowledge or wealth to set up
our own armories and factories to make our own
--or the men to run them."
  "Yes, so true, Sire. You are so wise,"
she agreed. Then sadly, she took a deep
breath. "All daimyos are impoverished and in
debt--us as much as any."
  "Eh? The harvest?" he asked sharply.
  "So sorry to bring bad news, less than
last year."
  "How much less?"
  "About a third."
  "That is dreadful news, and just when I need
extra revenue!" His fist bunched. "Farmers
are all baka."
  "So sorry, it is not their fault,
Yoshi-chan, the rains were too late or too
early, the sun too. This year the gods have not
smiled on us."
  "There are no gods, Hosaki-chan, but there
is karma. Karma that there is a bad harvest--you
will have to put up taxes nonetheless."
  Her eyes glistened with tears. "There will be
famine in the Kwanto before next harvest--and if
with us, the richest rice land in all
Nippon, what about the others?" The memory of the
famine four years ago rushed back at them.
Thousands had died, and tens of thousands in the
inevitable plagues that followed. And in the Great
Famine, twenty years ago, hundreds of
thousands had perished. "This is indeed the Land of
Tears."
  He nodded absently. Then he said, his voice
acid, "You will increase taxes by a tenth part,
all samurai will get a tenth part less. Talk
to the moneylenders. They can increase our loans.
The money will be spent on armaments."
  "Of course." Then added carefully, "We are
better off than most, only next year's
harvest is pledged. But it will be difficult to get
ordinary interest rates."
  He said irritably, "What do I know or
care of interest rates, make the best arrangement
you can." His face tightened. "Perhaps the time has
come to propose to the Council we adjust
"interest rates" like my great-grandfather."
  Sixty odd years ago the Sh@ogun, crushed
under the weight of his father's debts, with years of
future harvests mortgaged like those of all
daimyos, and goaded by the ever-increasing arrogance and
disdain of the merchant class, had abruptly
decreed that all debts were cancelled and all
future harvests debt free.
  In the two and a half centuries since
Sekigahara this extreme act had been
promulgated four times. It caused chaos throughout
the land. Suffering amongst all classes was huge,
especially samurai. There was little the rice
merchants, the main moneylenders, could do. Many
went bankrupt. A few committed seppuku.
The rest slid under cover as best they could and
suffered in the general lake of pain.
  Until the next harvest. Then farmers needed
merchants, and all people needed rice, and so,
carefully, sales were consummated and scarce--
therefore highly expensive--money was loaned to them
for seed and tools against the next harvest, and once
more, but very humbly, money and credit was advanced
to samurai, against their expected income, for living
and entertainment, and silks and swords. Soon
samurai overspending became endemic. With greater
care moneylenders slipped back into business.
Soon inducements had to be offered to them,
samurai status was reluctantly proffered and
gratefully purchased for some sons and
everything was soon as before, with fiefs in pawn.
  "Perhaps you should, Sire." She was as disgusted as
he with moneylenders. "I have secret stocks of
rice against famine, your men would be hungry but they
will not starve."
  "Good. Barter these for the guns."
  "So sorry, the amount would not be
significant," she told him gently,
appalled with his naivet`e and added quickly to divert
him, "Meanwhile taxes will not produce the cash
gai-jin will require."
  "Then it will have to be the moneylenders," he said
sharply. "Do whatever is necessary. I must have
guns."
  "Yes." She allowed the silence to gather then,
slowly, put forward a long pondered plan:
"Something you said before you left home gave me an
idea, Sire. The small gold mine in our
north mountains. I propose we increase the work
force."
  "But you have told me many times the mine is already
scavenged to capacity and produces less
revenue every year."
  "True, but you made me realize our miners
are not experts and my thought is that where there is one
vein, there may be others if we had expert
prospectors to seek them out. Perhaps our methods
are old-fashioned. Amongst the gai-jin there may
be experts."
  He looked at her. "How so?"
  "I was talking to Old Smelly"--this was the
nickname of an old Dutchman who, years ago
had been a merchant at Deshima and had been
enticed to become one of Yoshi's tutors and who,
with the gift of maids, a youthful consort and much
sak`e had been induced to stay until it was too
late to leave. "He told me about a huge
gold rush in the Land of the Golden Mountain you
mentioned, only thirteen years ago, where gai-jin
of all nations went to steal a fortune from the earth.
Also, a few years ago there was another such gold
rush in a land far to our south--he called it Van
Diemen's Land. In Yokohama there must be men
who took part in one or the other. Experts."
  "And if they exist?" Yoshi wondered about
Misamoto.
  "I suggest you offer them safe passage and
half the gold they discover within one year. There are
many Americans and adventurers in the Settlement
so I am told."
  "You would want gai-jin wandering about our lands,
spying our lands?" he asked slowly.
  She shook her head then leaned forward, knowing she
had his complete attention. "Once again you
provided the solution, Yoshi-chan. Say you
approached the most important Yokohama
trader, in secret, the one you told me you thought
was going to supply Choshu with rifles--I agree
we must get rifles and modern cannon at all
costs and prevent enemies from acquiring them.
Say you offer him your gold concession, an
exclusive. In return he arranges all
aspects of the search and mining. You would accept
only one or two unarmed prospectors, and of
course they would be closely monitored. In
return you are supplied immediately with so many
cannon and rifles in advance, against your half
of the gold found, and this merchant agrees to sell
guns and cannon only to you. Never to Choshu,
Tosa or Satsumas. You smile, Sire?"
  "And our go-between is Misamoto?"
  "Without your cleverness in discovering and training him
this would not be possible." She said it with perfect
deference, and sat back, secretly content,
listening to his comments and her replies, knowing that he
would put her plan into operation quickly, that they would
somehow get some guns and never never never barter her
secret rice away. Then, shortly, she could
pretend to be tired and beg his permission to rest:
"You should rest also, Sire, after such a marvelous
though strenuous practice session ..."
  Of course he should, a fine man like him, she
thought. And once there, many judicious compliments,
asking permission to massage his tired shoulder
muscles, cautiously becoming more intimate, a
sigh or two and quickly he would be as close as she
could ever desire. As close as Koiko.
  Earlier Koiko had correctly begged
permission to visit her and had bowed and thanked her
and said that she hoped her services had pleased the
Great Lord, that she was honored to be allowed
into his household for even a brief time. They
had chatted for a while and then she had gone away.
  Such a beauty, Hosaki thought without jealousy,
or envy. Yoshi is entitled to a toy, however
expensive, from time to time. Their beauty is so
fragile, so transient, their life so sad,
truly cherry blossoms from the Tree of Life.
A man's world is so much more physically exciting
than ours. Eeee, to be able to go from
flower to flower without hurt or thought.
  If the punishment for even a little philandering on
our side was not so immediate and severe, women would
consider it much more frequently. Wouldn't we? Why
not? If it was safe.
  Sometimes, when Yoshi is away, the thought of such
enormous danger and immediate death is an almost
overwhelming aphrodisiac. Foolish, for such a
fleeting pleasure. Is it?
  She waited, watching him, a warm glow within,
adoring the game of life while his mind was abuzz
with variations of the plan and how to use his creation,
Misamoto.
  I will start at once, he was thinking. Hosaki
has a good mind and is clever at putting my
ideas together. But, eeee, to articulate that about the
boy was baka in the extreme, however correct
an Act of State such an action might be.
Women have no finesse.

        END OF VOLUME IV





 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



    Volume Very of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 901-1124




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK TWO

                 

    Friday, 17th October: (continued)
  In the Settlement this morning, just before dawn,
Jamie McFay had given Nemi a final
kiss and then together they walked down the corridor
to Malcolm Struan's suite. He knocked
gently. At once the door opened and the young
girl, Shizuka, came out, eased the door
closed, smiled curiously and began whispering
to Nemi who took McFay by the arm and hurried
him to the landing.
  "What? Bad news, heya?" McFay
asked nervously--he had caught a glimpse of
Struan fast asleep in the huge four-poster before
the door closed but all had seemed well.
Nemi paid no attention to him and continued
to cross-question the girl.
  Exasperated, McFay said, "Nemi, what?
What bad?"
  She hesitated, then with an initial flood of
singsong apologetic Japanese, caught herself
and beamed, "No bad, Jami-san, you-ah cum
Yoshiwara t'morrow, yes no?" She put on
her cloak and began to go down the stairs but he
stopped her.
  "What bad, Nemi?" he asked
suspiciously.
  She stared up at him a moment, then more
Japanese and pidgin that did not make sense.
Finally she shrugged, "S'kr't, wakarimasu
ka?"
  "S'kr't? Iy`e, for God's sake.
What skre't, heya?"
  "S'krit, Jami-san, hai?"
  "Ah, secret, for God's sake!
Wakarimasu! Secret what?"
  She sighed with relief and beamed. "S'kret,
gud! S'kret, Jami-san, Shizuka,
Nemi. Hai? Hai?"
  "Hai. Us keep secret. Now what?"
  More incomprehensible Japanese and more pidgin
as they put on their outer robes and then,
frustrated because she could not explain properly or
that she had to explain at all, Nemi parodied
plenty of movement and whispered, "Shizuka gud,
work gud o'rr night."
  "Tai-pan good?"
  Her eyes soared. "Hai, Jami-san,
Shizuka gud!"
  All his questions had only produced more bowing and
smiles from both of them, so he had thanked
Shizuka, her fee already arranged--"tai-pan
credit plenti werri gud," the mama-san had
told him. For a last time Nemi swore him
to secrecy. The waiting servant took them back
to the Yoshiwara.
  Perturbed but not knowing why, though sure he not
been told all the truth, he had tiptoed back
and stood over the bed but Struan was fast asleep,
breathing peacefully, so he had left and gone
to his office and worked.
  Until just after ten.
  "Hello, Doctor, come in, good to see you,
what's new?"
  Hoag's face was grim. "Ah Tok sent for
me and I've just seen Malcolm, that's what's
new. I wish to Christ you'd asked me first before
you--oh for God's sake, Jamie," the squat,
good man added quickly, seeing him flush, "I know
he asked you to arrange it, I just wish you'd thought
to ask me first--I would have thought it bloody
obvious it would be bloody dangerous and bloody
ridiculous to try so soon after that wound with half
your inside patched and near to bursting ..." He
stopped and sat down. "Sorry, but I had to let
that out."
  "That's all right--is it bad?"
  "I don't know, some blood in his urine and
plenty of pain in his loins. It seems she was very
vigorous, he got carried away and when he
climaxed he said his stomach spasmed with the surge
and then cramped up. Poor fellow, though he's
in a lot of pain now, he did tell me she was
worth it."
  "He said that?"
  "Yes, in some detail--don't mention that I
told you, eh? I've given him some painkiller
so he'll sleep for an hour or two. I'll be
back later." Hoag sighed and got up with a
grim smile. "I had another note from Mrs.
Struan, did you?"
  "Yes, more of the same. Will you order him back
to Hong Kong now?"
  "I can't order him to do anything. He goes
when he wants to go, this is the storm season for
God's sake. He's wise to stay--
unless there's anything pressing in Hong Kong."
  "There are dozens of reasons--that's the seat of
power, there's nothing for him to do here really."
  Hoag shrugged. "I agree Hong Kong would
be better--I'd planned to go back with the mail
ship but after last night I think I'll wait for a
few more days for him."
  "Take him with you, please, on the mail
ship."
  "I already suggested it and was told, rather
impolitely "no." Forget it, Jamie,
it's not wrong for him to rest here and a foul sea
voyage would be extremely bad for him, maybe
a killer. By the way, I hear there may be
another ball next Tuesday with Angel T's
the guest of honor."
  "Malcolm didn't mention it."
  "Under the auspices of Ambassador
Seratard, of dubious ancestry, father of all the
French. Well I must be going--keep me
advised and if Malcolm asks for a similar
bout, check with me first, privately."
  "All right. Thanks, Doctor."
  Later Vargas knocked, "Senhor, Ah
Tok says the tai-pan wants to see you."
  Climbing the staircase, there was a sudden nasty
twinge in Jamie's stomach, imagining himself in
Malcolm's place.
  "Senhor McFay!" Vargas called up from
the stairwell. "Excuse me, but the Choshu
samurai have just arrived, about ordering the rifles,
senhor."
  "I'll be right back."
  McFay knocked and opened the door.
"Hello, Tai-pan," he said kindly.
Struan was propped in bed, his eyes strange, a
flat smile on his face. "How're you today?"
  "You saw Hoag?"
  "Yes."
  "Good, then you know she was very satisfactory and,
well, thanks, Jamie. She helped
tremendously though ..." Struan laughed
nervously, "though the finish shook me up a bit.
Terrific body. It was all very satisfactory
but I don't think I'll need a repeat
performance until I'm really better. She
certainly got rid of the, the logjam." Again the
short, nervous laugh. "Didn't realize,
Jamie, how strong a little girl like that could be,
or how much ... you understand, eh?"
  "Of course. Everything went according to plan?"
  For an instant Struan wavered, then he said
firmly, "Yes, better than that--I want you
to double her fee."
  "Certainly." McFay read the underlying
anxiety and his heart went out to him. Obviously
whatever happened Malcolm's deal with Shizuka
was secret. If that's the way he wants it,
fine. Not up to me. What's done is done. Just
another secret to add to all the rest. "Glad it
was all right."
  "Better than all right. Did the girl say
anything?"
  "Only that she, er, worked hard all night,
to, well, to try to please you."
  A bright knock on the door and Angelique
sailed in, blooming with good health, chic in a
new lavender dress, parasol, feathered hat,
gloves and shawl. "Hello, my love, hello
Jamie, how are you today? Oh Malcolm, I'm
so pleased to see you." As she bent over the bed
to kiss Struan tenderly, "Oh, ch@eri, how
I've missed you."
  The moment the door had opened the hearts of both
men stretched. McFay's nervousness soared, at
once his eyes checked the bed and room to see if
there were any telltale signs. But all was neat
and tidy, clean new sheets and pillowcases
daily--more Struan fastidiousness about
cleanliness, to the point of foolishness, he thought--
clean shirt every day? Ridiculous, once or
twice a month more than enough but then he knew the
habit had been implanted by Dirk Struan and
whatever the tai-pan had decreed was law for
Tess Struan and therefore her family. Struan
was freshly shaved, clean nightshirt, the windows
opened to the sea breeze that would carry away any
trace of perfume. He began to breathe easier
then she said, "I saw Dr. Hoag," and both
men almost went into spasm again.
  "You poor darling," she said with hardly a
pause, "he told me you'd had a bad night,
poor darling, and that you won't come to Sir
William's soiree this evening, so I thought
I'd just drop in and sit with you until lunch."
  Again, the gorgeous smile that seduced both of
them and she arranged herself in the tall chair--
Struan weak with love for her, at the same time
sick with guilt. I must have been insane to want
a whore to substitute for the love of my
life, he thought, glorying in her open warmth,
wanting to blurt out about Shizuka, and beg her
forgiveness.
  The night had begun well enough with Shizuka
undressing and smiling and pressing against him,
fondling and encouraging. He had touched her too,
fondling and was both proud and anxious. Awkward
and painful to position normally and move normally so
staying seated and beginning but not quite, then of a sudden
Angelique's face and presence had swamped
him, unbidden and unwanted. His manhood
vanished. And as much as Shizuka had tried and he
had tried, it would not return.
  They rested and tried again, the ache for him awful
now, overlaid with frantic, impotent rage and
his need to prove himself. More groping and trying--she
was well trained with hand and lips and body but nothing
would create that which responded in varying degrees
to lust and need, but especially to love and its
indefinable mystery. Nor, whatever she did, could
she or he dispel the spectre. Or conquer the
pain.
  At length she gave up, her young body sheened
with perspiration and panting from her exertions.
"Gomen nasai, Tai-pan," she had
whispered, again and again, apologizing, but hiding her
fury and almost in tears at his impotence, for she
had never failed before, and was expecting him to send for
servants any moment to beat her and throw her out for
failure to arouse him as a civilized person would
do. And more than anything, she was beset with anxiety
as to how she would explain her inadequacy to her
mama-san. Buddha bear witness: this man
failed, not me!
  "Gomen nasai, gomen nasai," her
mouth kept saying.
  "It's the accident," he mumbled, despising
himself, the pain grotesque, telling her about the
Tokaid@o and his wounds even though he knew she
would not understand the words, his frustration shattering him.
When that storm had passed and his tears had passed,
he made her lie beside him, had stopped her trying
again and had made her understand that she would get a double
fee if she kept everything secret.
"Secret, wakarimasu ka?"' he pleaded
with her.
  "Hai, Tai-pan, wakarimasu," she
had agreed happily, found the medicine he
required and then cradled him to sleep.
  "Malcolm ..." Angelique said.
  "Yes?" Struan said at once, concentrating,
his heart pounding, reminding him he had used the last
of Hoag's sleeping draft and that he must ask
Ah Tok to replace the mixture--for just a day
or so. "I'm so pleased to see you too."
  "Me too. How do you like my dress?"
  "It's wonderful and so are you," he said.
  "Think I'll be going, Tai-pan,"
McFay broke in, seeing how happy Struan
had become, pleased for him though still sweating. "The
Choshu reps are downstairs--all right to proceed
with them?"
  "As we decided. Good, thanks again,
Jamie. Let me know how it goes."
  "Malcolm," Angelique said quickly,
"while Jamie's here ... you remember you asked
me to remind you when we were all together about my, the
small allowance."
  "Ah yes, of course. Jamie," he said
expansively as she took his hand, her open
pleasure casting the night into oblivion--forever,
he thought happily. That night never happened!
"Put my fianc@ee's chits against my account,"
he told him with a twinge of happiness at the word.
"Angel, just sign chits, whatever you want,
Jamie will take care of them."
  "Thank you, ch@eri, that's wonderful, but
please can I have some money?"
  He laughed and Jamie smiled also. "You
don't need any here, there's no need for cash--
none of us carry money."
  "But Malcolm, I w--"
  "Angelique," he said his voice firmer.
"Chits are the way we pay for everything, at the
Club or at any store in the Settlement,
everyone does, even in Hong Kong, surely you
haven't forgotten. It stops tradesmen cheating and
you've a permanent record."
  "But I've always had money, ch@eri, money
of my own, to pay my own bills," she said with an
outward show of complete honesty, "and as my father
has ... well you understand."
  "Paying your own bills? What an appalling
idea. That's unheard of in good society. Now
don't worry yourself," he said, smiling at her,
"that's for men to do. Chits are our perfect
solution."
  "Perhaps French people are different, we always have
cash and--"
  "So do we in England and elsewhere, but
in Asia we all sign chits. Whatever you
want to buy just sign for it--even better we must
get you your personal chop, we'll choose the
perfect Chinese name for you." This was a small
stamp, usually a rectangular piece of ivory
or bone, the bottom of which was ornately carved
with the Chinese characters that sounded like the owner's name. When
pressed into an ink pad then onto paper, it would
produce a unique imprint almost impossible
to forge. "Jamie will arrange it for you."
  "Thank you, Malcolm. But then, well, can
I have my own account, ch@eri, I'm really very
good at managing."
  "I'm sure you are, now don't worry your
beautiful head, when we're married I'll
arrange it, but here it's unnecessary."
  She hardly listened to herself as she entertained
Struan with gossip from the French Legation, what
she had read in the papers, what her friend in Paris
had written about a superb residence--called
"hotel" there--on the Champs-Elys`ees
belonging to a Countess that would soon become
available and was so inexpensive, planting seeds for
their glorious future, making him laugh, waiting
for him to become drowsy when she would leave for her
lunch at the Club with the French officers, then
later to ride with them and some of the English navy
officers on the race course, then a siesta, then
to prepare for Sir William's soiree--no
reason not to go but first returning to say good night
to her soon-to-be husband.
  Everything marvelous and terrible, most of her mind
on her new dilemma: how to get cash. What
am I going to do? I have to have cash to pay for the
medicine, that swine Andr`e Poncin won't
advance it for me, I know he won't. Damn him
and damn my father for stealing my money! And damn
HIM of the Tokaid@o into eternal Hell forever!
  Stop that and think. Remember you are on your own
and you must solve your problems!
  My only possession of value is my
engagement ring and I can't sell that, I just can't.
Oh God, everything was going so well, I'm
officially engaged, Malcolm is getting
better, Andr`e is helping me but the medicine's
so expensive and I've no money, real money,
oh God, oh God what am I going to do?
  Tears spilled out of her eyes.
  "Good God, Angelique, what is it?"
  "Just that, just that I'm so unhappy,"
she sobbed and buried her head in the bedclothes, "so
unhappy that, that the Tokaid@o happened and you're
hurt and I ... I'm hurt too--it's not
fair."

  Sir William's ten-oared cutter sped through
the swell in double-quick time aimed at the flagship
anchored in the roads off Yokohama, her bow
wave heavy. He was alone in the cabin and he
stood, riding easily, frock coat, cutaway
and top hat. Sea fair, light fading in the
west, the clouds already grey but with no apparent
threat of storm. As she swung alongside the
ship, all oars went to the vertical, he jumped
onto the gangway, and hurried up to the main
deck to be piped aboard.
  "Afternoon sir," Lieutenant Marlowe saluted
smartly. "This way please." Past gleaming rows
of cannons to the quarterdeck--the main deck and
shrouds a hive of activity, cannons being
secured, hawsers coiled, sails checked,
smoke from the funnel--up a gangway then down
another to the second gun deck, past sailors
battening down and stowing gear, to the Admiral's
cabin aft. The marine sentry saluted as
Marlowe knocked. "Sir William, sir."
  "Well open the door Marlowe, for Christ's
sake."
  Marlowe held the door for Sir William and
began to close it. "Marlowe, stay here!" the
Admiral ordered.
  The large cabin filled the stern of the ship--many
small sea windows, big table and sea chairs
anchored to the deck, small bunk and toilet,
large sideboard with cut-glass decanters. The
Admiral and General half got up with token
politeness, and sat again. Marlowe stayed at the
door.
  "Thank you for arriving so expeditiously, Sir
William. Brandy? Sherry?"
  "Brandy, thank you Admiral Ketterer.
Trouble?"
  The florid-faced man glared at Marlowe.
"Would you oblige, Mr. Marlowe, brandy for
Sir William." He tossed a sheet of
paper on the table. "Dispatch from Hong Kong."
  With the usual flowery greetings, the dispatch
read:

                                  
You will proceed at once with the flagship and four
or five warships to the port of Boh Chih
Seh, north of Shanghai (coordinates
overleaf) where the main pirate fleet of Wu
Sung Choi is now harbouring. A week ago a
swarm of this pirate's junks, arrogantly
flying his flag--the White Lotus--intercepted
and sank H.m.'s mailship Bonny
Sailor in the waters off Mirs Bay, the
pirate haven north of Hong Kong. The fleet
here will deal with Mirs Bay--you will decimate
Boh Chih Seh and sink all craft not fishing
vessels if the leader, believed to be Chu
Fang Choy, refuses to strike his colours and
declines to surrender to Her Majesty's
justice.
  When accomplished, send one ship with a
report here and return to Yokohama, placing
yourself as usual at the disposition of Her
Majesty's servants. Show this to Sir
William and please give him the enclosed.
yrs., Stanshope, KCB, Governor Far
East.
  PS: The Bonny Sailor was lost with
all hands, 76 officers and men, ten passengers,
one of whom was an Englishwoman, the wife of a
trader here, a cargo of gold, opium and rice
worth ten thousand guineas. Chu Fang Choy had
the effrontery to have delivered to Government House
a sack containing the ship's log and forty-three
pairs of ears with a letter apologizing that the others
could not be recovered. The woman's were not included
and we fear the worst for her.

  "Bastards," Sir William muttered, with
an added queasiness at the thought that, as pirates were
endemic in all Asian waters, particularly from
Singapore north to Peking, and the White Lotus
fleets the most abundant and notorious of
all, the woman could easily have been his wife who
was due to arrive Hong Kong any week from
England with three of his children. "You leave on the
tide?"
  "Yes." The Admiral slid an envelope
across the table. Sir William broke the seals:

Dear Willie, The next mail ship will bring
the specie for the Legation expenses. Between ourselves,
sorry, Willie, but I cannot give you any
further troops at the moment, or
ships. In the spring possibly. I have been
ordered to return troops and ships to India where
the authorities fear repetition of the Mutiny of
five years ago. Added to that, the Punjab is in
ferment again, pirates plague the Persian
Gulf and damned nomads in Mesopotamia have
again cut the telegraph--another expeditionary
force is being organized to deal with them once and for
all!
  How is that poor fellow Struan? Questions
are bound to be asked in Parliament about
"failure to protect our nationals." News
of your Tokaid@o disaster should reach London within
two weeks, their answer not for two more months.
I trust they will countenance stiff reprisals, and
send us the money troops and ships to carry out their
orders. In the meantime weather the storm, if there
is one, as best you can. Hong Kong is seething
about this attack. Struan's mother is hopping mad
and all the riffraff China traders here (however
rich from their foul opium trade) are up in arms,
their misguided, slanted guttersnipe Press
demanding your resignation. Was it ever different? as
Disraeli would say! In haste, God speed,
yrs. Stanshope, KCB, Governor.

  Sir William took a large sip, hoping
his face did not betray his anxiety. "Good
brandy, Admiral."
  "Yes it is, my very best private stock, in
your honor," the Admiral said, furious that
Marlowe had given Sir William almost half
a tumbler and had not used the ordinary, second
grade he kept for visitors. Stupid berk,
he thought, he should know better--he'll never make
flag rank.
  "What about going to Osaka?" Sir William
asked.
  "Oh, Osaka? I regret you will have to delay
until I return." The smile was barely
concealed.
  "When will that be?" The sinking feeling became
worse.
  "To arrive at our destination, six or seven
days depending on the winds, two or three days
at Boh Chih Seh should be enough. I will have
to re-coal at Shanghai, oh I'd say I
should be off Yokohama again unless fresh orders
arrive in ..." The Admiral quaffed his port
and poured another. "I should be back in
four or five weeks."
  Sir William finished his brandy and this helped
to ease his nausea. "Lieutenant, would you be so
kind? Thanks."
  Marlowe took his glass politely and
refilled it with the Admiral's best, hiding his
disgust at being a flunky and totally fed up with this
aide-de-camp posting--wanting to be back on his
own ship, his own quarterdeck to supervise the
repairs the storm had caused. But at least
I'll see some action at long last, he thought with
relish, imagining the attack on the pirate
haven, all guns blazing.
  "Well, Admiral," Sir William was
saying, "if we fail to make good our threat we
will lose enormous face, the initiative, and
put ourselves in great danger."
  "It was your threat, Sir William, not ours.
As to face you put too much value on it, as
to danger--I presume you mean to the Settlement
--damme, Sir, the natives of Japan would not
dare to create any major problem. They didn't
really bother you at the Legation, they won't really
bother Yokohama."
  "With the fleet gone, we're helpless."
  "Not exactly, Sir William," the
General said stiffly. "The army is here in some
strength."
  "Quite right," the Admiral agreed, "but Sir
William is perfectly correct to say the
Royal Navy keeps the peace. I plan
to take four warships, sir, not five and leave
one frigate on station. That should be sufficient.
The Pearl."
  Before Marlowe could stop himself, he had said,
"Excuse me sir, she's still undergoing major
repairs."
  "I'm so glad to know you keep abreast of the
state of my fleet, Mr. Marlowe, and that you
keep your ears open," the Admiral said witheringly.
"Obviously Pearl can't go on this expedition so
you'd best report back aboard and make sure
she's in first-class seagoing condition ready for any
duty by sundown tomorrow or you won't have a ship."
  "Yessir." Marlowe gulped, saluted and
rushed off.
  The Admiral grunted and said to the General,
"Good officer but not dry behind the ears yet--fine
naval family, two brothers also officers and his
father's flag captain at Plymouth."
He looked at Sir William. "Don't
worry, his frigate will have stepped her mast by tomorrow
and be in good order--he's the best of my captains
but for God's sake don't tell him I said so.
He'll guard you until I return. If
there's nothing else, gentlemen, I put to sea
right smartly--so sorry I can't join you for
dinner."
  Sir William and the General finished their
drinks and stood up. "God speed, Admiral
Ketterer, may you come back safely with all
hands," Sir William said sincerely, the
General echoing him. Then his face hardened. "If
I don't get any satisfaction from the
Bakufu I will leave for Osaka as planned, in
Pearl or not, at the head of the army or not--but
by God, go to Osaka and Ky@oto I will."
  "Best wait until I return, best be
prudent, best not swear by God to undertake such an
ill-advised action, Sir William," the
Admiral said curtly. "God might decide
otherwise."

  That evening, just before midnight, Angelique,
Phillip Tyrer and Pallidar left the
British Legation and strolled down High
Street heading for the Struan Building. "La,"
she said happily, "Sir William certainly
has a modest chef!"
  They were all in evening dress and they laughed for the
food had been abundant English fare and
especially delicious--a side of roast beef,
trays of pork sausages and fresh crabs
brought in on ice from Shanghai in the mail
ship's ice room as part of the diplomatic pouch
and therefore not subject to customs inspection or
duty. These were served with boiled vegetables,
roast potatoes, also imported from Shanghai,
with Yorkshire pudding and followed by apple pies
and mince pies with all the claret, Pouilly
Fum`e, port and champagne the twenty guests
could drink.
  "And when Madam Lunkchurch threw a crab
at her husband I thought I would die," she said
to more laughter but Tyrer, embarrassed, said,
"I'm afraid some of the so-called traders, and
their wives are inclined to be boisterous. Please
don't judge all Englishmen, or women, by their
behavior."
  "Quite right." Pallidar was beaming,
delighted that he also had been accepted as part of
her escort and conscious that his evening dress
uniform and plumed cap made Tyrer's drab
frock coat, his old-fashioned and abundant
silk cravat and top hat seem even more
funereal. "Dreadful people. Without your presence, the
evening would have been awful, no doubt at all."
  High Street and its side streets were still
busy with traders, clerks and others weaving their
way home to their dwellings or strolling the
promenade, the odd drunk lying by the oil lamps
that lit the length of it. An occasional cluster of
Japanese fishermen, carrying oars and nets, and
paper lanterns to light their way, trudged up from
the shore where their boats were beached, or headed down
from the village for their night's fishing.
  At the front door of the Struan Building
she stopped and held out her hand to be kissed.
"Thank you and good night, dear friends, please
don't bother to wait, one of the servants can see
me back to the Legation."
  "Wouldn't dream of it," Pallidar said at
once, taking her hand and holding on for a moment.
  "I--we'd be glad to wait," Tyrer
assured her.
  "But I may be an hour or a few minutes,
depending how my fianc`e is."
  But they insisted and she thanked them, and she
swept past the liveried, armed night watchman,
up the stairs, crinoline billowing, trailing her
shawl--still caught up in the excitement of the evening
and the adoration that surrounded her. "Hello darling,
just wanted to say good night."
  Struan wore an elegant red silk
dressing gown over a loose shirt and trousers with
soft boots, cravat at his throat and he got
up out of the chair, the pain deadened now by the elixir
Ah Tok had given him half an hour ago.
"I feel better than I have for days, my
darling. A bit wobbly, but fine--how lovely you
are." The light from the oil lamp made his gaunt
face more handsome than ever, and her more desirable than
ever. He put his hands on her shoulders to steady
himself, his head and body feeling strangely light,
her skin creamy and warm to his touch. Her eyes
were dancing and he looked down, loving her, and
kissed her. Gently at first, then, as she
responded, glorying further in her taste and
welcome. "I love you," he murmured between
kisses.
  "I love you," she replied, believing it and
weak with pleasure, so happy that he seemed
truly better, his lips strong and seeking and hands
strong and seeking but within bounds, bounds that suddenly,
deliriously, she wanted to cast aside.
"Je t'aime, ch@eri ... je t'aime
..."
  For a moment they stood in their embrace and then
with a strength he did not know he had, he lifted
her and sat again in the big, high-backed chair and
cradled her in his lap, lips touching, one arm
around her tiny waist, a hand quietly on her
breast, the silk seeming to enhance the half-cupped
warmth beneath. Wonder filled him. Wonder that here
where every part of her was covered and forbidden, in the
night, all was open and offered and as young, but now he
was more euphoric and stimulated than he had ever
been, yet at the same time controlled, no longer
frantic with lust.
  "So strange," he murmured and thought, but not so
strange, the pain's masked by the medicine. The
rest isn't, my love for her.
  "Ch@eri?"
  "Strange that I need you so much yet I can
wait. Not long but I can wait."
  "Please not long, please." Again her lips
sought his, nothing in her mind but him, heat welding
her memory closed and worry closed and never a
problem anymore. For both of them. Then the sudden
sound of a nearby gunshot from outside.
  Their mood shattered, she sat upright on his
lap and before she knew it was hurrying for the
half-open window. Below she could see Pallidar
and Tyrer--damn, I'd forgotten them, she thought.
The two men were looking inland, then they turned, their
attention directed towards Drunk Town.
  She craned out of the window but saw only a
vague group of men at the far end, their bleary
shouts wafted on the wind. "It seems to be
nothing, just Drunk Town ..." she said, guns and
fights, even duels, not rare in that part of
Yokohama. Then, feeling strange and chilled and
at the same time flushed, she came back and
looked at him. With a little sigh she knelt and
took his hand and pressed it to her cheek, her head
in his lap, but his gentleness and his fingers caressing
her hair and the nape of her neck no longer
drove the devils away. "I should go home, my
love."
  "Yes." His fingers continued their
stroking.
  "I want to stay."
  "I know."
  Struan saw himself, out of himself, the perfect
gentleman, calm, quiet, helping her to her
feet, waiting while she straightened her bodice
and hair and draped her shawl around her. Then, hand
in hand, walking slowly with her to the head of the stairs
where he allowed himself to be persuaded to stay,
permitting a servant to lead her below. At the
door she turned once and waved a loving
farewell and he waved and then she was gone.
  It seemed to take him no effort to walk back
and undress, letting his servant pull off his
boots. Then into bed with no help at all, lying
back at peace with himself and the world. Head fine,
body fine, relaxed.
  "How is my son?" Ah Tok whispered from the
doorway.
  "In the Land of the Poppy."
  "Good, good. No pain for my son there."
  The servant blew out the flame and then left
him.


  Down the High Street, the French soldier
sentry, his uniform as sloppy as his manner,
opened the Legation door for her, "Bonsoir,
Mademoiselle."
  "Bonsoir, Monsieur. Good night
Phillip, good night Settry." The door
closed and she leaned against it a moment to collect
herself. The delight of the evening had vanished. In
its place, the spectres were crowding for attention.
Deep in thought she walked across the hall towards
her suite, saw a light under Seratard's
door. She stopped and, on a sudden impulse that
this might be a perfect time to ask for a loan, she
knocked and went in. "Oh! Andr`e! Hello,
excuse me, I was expecting Monsieur
Henri."
  "He's still with Sir William. I'm just
finishing a dispatch for him." Andr`e was at
Seratard's desk, many papers spread around. The
dispatch dealt with Struan's, their possible arms
deal with the Choshu, and the possible help that a
possible French wife might render their fledgling
arms industry. "Did you have a good time? How's
your fianc`e?"
  "He's much better, thank you. The
dinner was huge, if you like to eat heavily. Ah
to be in Paris, yes?"
  "Yes." My God she's beddable, he thought,
and that reminded him of the infectious vileness eating
him away.
  "What is it?" she asked, startled by his
sudden pallor.
  "Nothing." He cleared his throat and fought
to control the horror. "Just out of sorts--nothing
grave."
  He seemed so vulnerable, so helpless that
abruptly she decided to trust him again and closed
the door and sat near him, pouring out her story.
"What am I going to do, dear Andr`e? I can't
get any cash ... what can I do?"
  "Dry your tears, Angelique, the answer
is so simple. Tomorrow or the next day I will
take you shopping," he said, his mind quite clear for
mundane matters. "You've asked me to go
shopping with you, haven't you, to help find an
engagement present for More'sieur Struan.
Gold cuff links with pearls, and pearl earrings
for yourself." His voice saddened. "But oh so
terrible, somewhere en route back from the jewelers you
lose one pair--we look everywhere but no
avail. Terrible!" His pale brown eyes held
hers. "Meanwhile the mama-san has her
secret payment, I will make sure the pair you
"lose" more than covers the medicine, and all
costs."
  "You're wonderful!" she burst out and hugged
him. "Wonderful, what would I do without you?" She
embraced him again, thanked him again and virtually
danced out of the room.
  He looked at the closed door a long time.
Yes it will cover the medicine, and my twenty
louis, and other expenses if I decide, he
thought, curiously unsettled. Poor little
cabbage, so easy to manipulate you. You
embroil yourself in deeper and deeper whirlpools.
Don't you realize that now you become a thief and
worse, you're a criminal planning a willful
fraud.
  And you, Andr`e, you are an accessory to the
conspiracy.
  He laughed outright, a bad twisted laugh.
Prove it! Will she tell a court about an
abortion, will the mama-san be witness against me?
Will the court believe the story of the daughter and
niece of criminals against mine?
  No, but God will know and soon you will be before
HIM.
  Yes, and HE will know I've done much
worse. And intend to do even more evil.
  Tears began to stream down his face.

  "Ayeeyah, Miss'ee," Ah Soh, said,
trying to help Angelique undress, who would not
be still, again in a merry mood, her immediate problem
solved. "Miss'ee!"
  "Oh very well but do hurry." Angelique
stood by her bed but continued to hum her cheery
polka, the room more feminine and friendly in the oil
light than during the day, the glass windows
slightly ajar with the slatted shutters barred.
  "Miss'ee gud time heya?" Nimbly Ah
Soh began to untie the waist straps of the
crinoline.
  "Good, thank you," Angelique said
politely, not liking her particularly. Ah
Soh was a big-hipped, middle-aged woman, a
servant and not a real amah. "But she's so
old, Malcolm, can't you find me someone young and
pretty who laughs!"
  "Gordon Chen, our compradore, chose her,
Angel. He guarantees she's completely
trustworthy, she can brush your hair, bath you, can
look after your European clothes, and she's my
gift to you while she's with you in Japan. ..."
  The straps loosened and the crinoline fell
away, then Ah Soh did the same with the
petticoat and last the vast framework of hoops
of bone and metal that gave the crinoline body.
Long pantaloons, silk stockings, short
slip and the boned cinch and corset that made her
twenty-inch waist eighteen inches and swelled her
breasts fashionably. As the maid unlaced the
cinch-corset Angelique let out a deep sigh
of contentment, stepped out of the sea of material and
flopped on the bed and, as a child would, allowed herself
to be undressed completely. Obediently she
raised her arms to permit the flowery nightdress
to be eased around her.
  "Sit, Miss'ee."
  "No, not tonight, Ah Soh, my hair can
wait."
  "Ayeeyah, t'morro no gud!" Ah Soh
brandished the brush.
  "Oh all right." Angelique sighed and
scrambled off the bed and sat by the dressing
table and allowed her to take out the pins and begin
to brush. It felt very good. Oh how clever Andr`e
is! He makes everything so simple--now I can
get all the money I need, oh how clever he
is.
  From time to time a benign sea breeze creaked the
shutters. A hundred yards away, across the
promenade, waves ran up the pebbled shore and
departed and came again with a good sound that promised
another gentle night that all in the Settlement
had welcomed. The fleet had left with the light.
Everyone not drunk or bedridden had watched the
ships sail off with varying degrees of anxiety.
All wished them God speed and a quick return.
Except the Japanese. Ori was one of them and
he had his eyes pressed to a crack in one of her
shutters, well hidden and camouflaged by the tall
camellia bushes that grew here abundantly and
Seratard, a keen gardener, had had planted.
  Long before midnight Ori was in this ambush,
waiting for her, time passing slowly, thinking and
rethinking schemes, exhausting himself, nervously
checking and rechecking that his short sword was loose
in its scabbard and the derringer safe in the sleeve of
his fisherman's kimono. But when he had seen her
approaching the Legation in the company of the two
gai-jin, all his tiredness had vanished.
  For a moment he had contemplated rushing out and
killing them but discarded that foolishness knowing it was
unlikely he could kill the three of them, and the
sentry, before being killed himself. And anyway, he
thought grimly, that would end my plan to have her once
more before I die, and then to burn the Settlement.
Without me to goad Hiraga he will never do it.
He's too weak now--he's gai-jin infected.
If Hiraga the Strong can succumb so quickly,
what about others? The Emperor is right to hate
gai-jin and want them expelled!
  So he curbed his anger and slunk deeper
into hiding, biding his time, planning for any
eventuality. No way through the windows unless she
unbarred them. The back door was unguarded and
possible--and plenty of footholds to the next
floor if it would not open. He had watched the
undressing in every detail, barely two paces
away, beyond the wall. Now she was being tucked
into bed, the maid fussing about her mistress. His
impatience became almost unbearable.
  Earlier one of the mixed naval and army
patrols that roamed the Settlement
nightly to keep order had suddenly challenged him
in a lane behind High Street. He had stopped
without fear, there was no curfew nor was any part
of the Settlement forbidden Japanese though,
wisely, they kept mostly to their own quarter and
chose not to tempt gai-jin temper.
Unfortunately the Sergeant had rudely shoved
a lantern in his face making him jerk back,
startled. The concealed short sword clattered to the
ground. "'ere, you little bastard, you knows daggers'n
the like is forbidden, kinjiru."
  Though Ori did not understand the words, the rule and
penalty were common knowledge. At once he grabbed up
his knife and fled, the Sergeant fired at him but
the bullet haranggged off a tile harmlessly and
he leapt over a low wall to lose himself in the
maze of lanes and dwellings. The patrol did
not bother to give chase, just shouted a few curses
after him, carrying a knife was a small
misdemeanor, worth only an immediate beating and the
weapon confiscated.
  Again he had waited in hiding until he could
join a group of fishermen to go down to the shore, then
doubled back, scaled the Legation fence and quickly
found a safe place. Once there he had
slumped down and began to wait.
  This morning, he had pretended he was ready
to leave the Yoshiwara for Ky@oto as Hiraga
had demanded. "As soon as I've contacted
Katsumata there, I'll send you a
message," he had said, deliberately
tight-lipped. "Make sure the girl does not
escape!"
  "She's the tai-pan's woman so her every step
is measured and she'll be easy to find,"
Hiraga had told him, as coldly. "Watch
yourself, the Tokaid@o will be dangerous--Enforcer
patrol and barrier guards will be very alert."
  "Better we honor sonno-joi, better
you allow me to stay, better we burn
Yokohama, Akimoto arrives today, we could do
it easily."
  "We will, when you return. If you stay now you
will make a mistake, the woman has turned your
head and made you dangerous, to yourself, your friends and
sonno-joi."
  "What about you, Hiraga? The gai-jin have
turned you and twisted your judgment."
  "No. I tell you a last time."
  Careless of provoking Hiraga even
more, he flared, "You saw what scum gai-jin
are, drunk and revolting, fighting like beasts,
carousing in the filth of Drunk Town--are these the
men you want to know more of, to be like?"'
  "Go!"
  As angrily he had collected his short
sword and derringer. At Raiko's suggestion he
joined the daily procession of servants leaving for
Kanagawa market where the best sak`e and foods
were purchased. With them he had passed through the
Yoshiwara and Settlement barriers, the Enforcer
patrol still lurking amongst the guards, making them
as nervous as the villagers. Halfway
to Kanagawa, the road traffic heavy, he had
slipped away to the shore. There he had bribed a
fisherman to row him to the far end of the Settlement,
near Drunk Town, to hide him till dusk.
  I am doing the correct thing, he thought with
absolute conviction, the small sea wind
scattering the night insects. The woman is the
perfect target for sonno-joi. Whatever
Hiraga says I may never have another chance
to cast away her spell. Yes, I am in her
spell. She must be a kami, a spirit, a wolf
woman reborn gai-jin, no other woman could be
virgin and drugged yet still be as welcoming, no
other could make a man explode like I
exploded, or keep me deranged with desire.
  Tonight I will lay her for the second time. Then I
will kill her. If I escape, karma. If I
do not escape, karma. But she will die by my hand.
  The sweat was running down his face and back.
Once more he concentrated, watching her through the
crack, so very close that, but for the wall he could
almost reach out and touch her. She climbed into bed,
nightdress revealing. Now the maid turned down
the oil flame to leave a warm glow of light.
  "'nite, Miss'ee."
  "'nite, Ah Soh."
  Happy to be alone, Angelique snuggled
down in the bedclothes, watching the flame shadows
dance with the drafts, her head resting comfortably on
her arm. Before Kanagawa the dark had never
bothered her and she would go quickly into dreamtime
to awake refreshed. Since Kanagawa her
pattern had changed. Now she insisted on a
night light. Sleep did not come easily.
Soon her mind took her into paths of wild
surmise. Her hands would stray to her breasts.
Are they a little fuller than yesterday,
my nipples more sensitive? Yes, yes they
are, no it is just imagination. And my stomach?
Is it rounder? No, there's no difference and yet
...
  And yet there is a vast difference, like B.c.
and A.d. and at least once a day I wonder,
would it be a boy or girl? Or devil, taking
after the rapist father. No, no child of mine could be
devil!
  Devil. That reminds me today's Friday and in
two days I have to go to church and confess again. The
words get no easier. How I hate confession
now and loathe Father Leo, such a fat, uncouth,
tobacco-smelling and lecherous old man. He
reminds me of Aunt Emma's confessor in
Paris--the ancient Scot, smelling of whisky,
whose French was as vile as his cassock. Lucky
for me that neither she nor Uncle Michel were
fanatic, just ordinary Sunday Catholics. I
wonder how she is, and poor Uncle Michel.
Tomorrow I will speak to Malcolm ...
  Dear dear Malcolm, he was so nice tonight, so
strong and wise and oh how I wanted him. So
glad I can talk to him, so lucky for me that
Aunt Emma refused to learn French so I had
to learn English. How could she possibly
survive in Paris all those years speaking only
English, and what possessed Uncle Michel
to marry her and endure such hardship? Though I
love her and him, she so dowdy, he so ordinary.
  Love! That's what he would always say and she
would say and that they had met when he was in Normandy
one summer vacation, she an actress with a
travelling Shakespearean troupe, he a
junior official. It was love at first glance,
they would always say, and tell how beautiful she was
and handsome he was. Then running away together,
married within the week, so romantic but not so
happy ever after.
  But we will be, Malcolm and I. Ah yes,
and I will love Malcolm as a modern wife
should, we'll have lots of children, they'll be brought up
Catholic, it won't matter to him, he's not
fanatic either: "I'm really not, Angelique.
Of course we'll be married according to Protestant
traditions, Mother will not have it otherwise, of that
I'm certain. Afterwards we can have a Catholic
ceremony, privately, if you wish ..."
  Never mind even if it's secret, it's the
real marriage--not like the other--the children will
be accepted into Mother Church, we will all live in
Paris most of the year, he will love me and I will
love him and we'll make love marvelously,
she thought, her heart beginning to thump pleasantly
as she let her mind roam. Deeper and deeper.
Then, because the evening had been wonderful and she
felt wonderful and quite safe, she allowed the
pleasing parts of that night's dream to return.
  She could remember none of it exactly. The
outrage dissolved pictures within erotic
pictures within erotic pictures. A little
burning that became a pervading warmth. Knowing but not
knowing. Feeling but not feeling strong arms
embracing, and being possessed by a
never-before-experienced sensuality and openness, head,
body, life, gloriously free to abandon all
restraint, to relish everything because it was ... just a
dream.
  But did I awake, or almost awake, and
only pretend that I didn't, she asked herself
again and again, always with a shudder. I could not have
responded that wantonly awake--surely not--but
the dream was so strong and, in its grasp, I was
driven by a tempest to want more and again more and ...
  She heard the outer door open and close and then
the bedroom door latch moving and whirled to see
Andr`e open the door silently and close it
silently, bolt it, and lean against it, a mocking
smile on his lips.
  Suddenly she was afraid. "What do you want,
Andr`e?"
  For a long time he did not answer, then came
over to the bed and stared down at her. "To ...
to talk, eh?" he said softly. "We should, eh?
Talk, or, or what?"
  "I don't understand," she said, understanding too
well, painfully aware of the disturbing glitter in
his eyes where only a few minutes before there had
been only compassion. But she kept her voice
reasonable, cursing herself that she had not barred the
door--never a need here, always servants or
Legation staff about and no one would dare enter without
permission. "Please, don't y--"
  "We should talk, about tomorrow and be, be friends."
  "Dear Andr`e, please, it's late, whatever
it is can wait until tomorrow, sorry but you've no
right to come in here without knock--" In momentary
panic she retreated to the other side of the bed as
he sat on the edge and reached for her. "Stop or
I'll scream!"
  His laugh was soft and barbed. "If you scream,
dear Angelique, that will bring the servants and I
will unlock the door and tell them you invited me
here--you wanted privacy to discuss your need for
money, cash money, for your abortion." Again the
mocking twisted smile. "Eh?"
  "Oh Andr`e, don't be like that, please leave,
please--if someone were to see you, please."
  "First ... first a kiss."
  She flushed. "Get out, how dare you!"
  "Shut up and listen," he whispered harshly and
his hand caught her wrist and held it in a vise,
"I can dare anything, if I want more than a
kiss you'll give it to me happily or else.
Without me you'll be found out, without me--"
  "Andr`e ... please let me go." As much as
she tried she could not break his grip. With a twisted
smile he released her. "You hurt me," she
said, near tears.
  "I don't want to hurt you," he said
throatily, his voice sounding strange to him and he
knew he was insane to be here and doing this, but he
had been caught up in such sudden horror that it
had overpowered his reason, his feet carrying him here
of their own volition, to force her to--to what?
To share his degradation. Why not? his brain was
shrieking, It's her fault, flaunting her tits
and blatant sexuality, reminding me! She's
no better than a street slut, maybe she
wasn't raped, isn't she out to trap Struan and
his millions by any means? "I'm, I'm your
friend, aren't I helping you? Come over here, a, a
kiss isn't much payment."
  "No!"
  "By Christ, do it happily or I'll stop
helping you and, in a day or two, I'll inform
Struan and Babcott, anonymously. You want
that? Eh?"
  "Andr`e, please ..." She looked around,
desperate for a way to escape. There was none.
He moved closer to her on the bed and reached for her
breast but she pushed his hand away and began to resist
and to fight and hacked with her nails for his eyes but
he held her helpless as she struggled, afraid
to call out, knowing she was snared and lost and would have
to submit. Abruptly, there was a violent pounding
on the shutter.
  The suddenness ripped Andr`e out of his madness and
she screamed in fright. Aghast, he leapt off the
bed, rushed for the door, unlocked it and the
one to the corridor, then whirled and ran to the
windows, pulling them open. In seconds he had
unbarred the shutters and shoved them outwards.
Nothing. No one there. Nothing but bushes waving in
the wind, the sound of the sea, the promenade beyond the
fence empty of people.
  A sentry hurried into view. "What's going
on?"
  "I should ask you that, soldier," Andr`e said, his
heart grinding, his words tumbling over. "Did you
see anyone, anything? I was passing
Mademoiselle's door and heard, or thought I
heard someone pounding on her shutters. Quick, look
around!"
  Behind him, Pierre Vervene, the Charg`e
d'Affairs, a flickering candle in his hand,
hurried anxiously into the room, dressing gown
over his nightshirt, nightcap askew. Others
began crowding the doorway, "What's going on--
oh, Andr`e! What the devil ... what's going
on? Mademoiselle, you screamed?"
  "Yes, I, he--" she stammered, "Andr`e
was, he, someone banged on the shutters and
Andr`e, well, he--"
  "I was just passing her door," Andr`e said, "and
rushed in--isn't that true, Angelique?"
  She dropped her eyes, holding the bedclothes
closer around her. "Yes, yes that's true," she
said, afraid and hating him but attempting to hide
it.
  Vervene joined Andr`e at the window and peered
out. "Perhaps it was the wind, we have sudden squalls
here and the shutters aren't exactly new." He
shook one of them. Indeed it was loose and rattled
noisily. Then he leaned out and shouted after the
sentry. "Make a very good search and come back and
report to me." Then he closed and barred the
shutters, and re-bolted the windows. "There!
Nothing to worry about."
  "Yes, yes, but ..." Tears of relief
began to well.
  "Mon Dieu, Mademoiselle, nothing
to worry about, don't cry, you're perfectly
safe, no need to worry, of course not."
Vervene took off his nightcap and scratched his
bald pate, at a loss. Then, thankfully,
he saw Ah Soh amongst the others at the
doorway and motioned at her importantly.
"Ah Soh, you-ah sleep here, with Miss'ee,
heya?"
  "Yes Mass'er." Ah Soh hurried off
to get some bedding and everyone else began to drift
away.
  "I'll wait with you, More'selle
Angelique, until she returns." The older
man yawned. "Probably you were both mistaken,
and it was the wind. Who would want to bang on the
shutters, eh? There aren't any rotten little
street urchins and guttersnipes in the
Settlement to play pranks or be
pickpockets, thank God! Must have been the
wind, eh?"
  "I'm sure you're right," Andr`e said, over his
scare now, dreading that someone had been outside,
watching--he had seen the crack but no other
signs. "Don't you agree Angelique?"
  "I, I, perhaps yes," she said, very unsettled
and not yet recovered from her fright, both because of him
and because of the sudden sound. Why did it happen then?
Was it someone, or just a God-given wind--truly
a gift from God? Wind or not, person or not
I don't care, she decided. I don't care,
I escaped, tomorrow I move back beside
Malcolm, daren't stay here, mustn't stay, too
close to Andr`e, too dangerous. "It sounded like
someone banging, but, but I could be mistaken. It
could have been a, a sudden gust."
  "I'm sure it was," Vervene said
confidently. "My shutters are always banging,
wake me up all the time." He coughed and sat
down, peering kindly at Andr`e whose face was still
chalky. "No need for you to wait, my friend. You
don't look very well at all, as though, Heaven
forbid, you've a crisis of the liver."
  "Perhaps, perhaps I have. I, I certainly
don't feel very well." Andr`e glanced at
Angelique. "Sorry," he said, holding her
eyes, making his voice calm and soft, seemingly
the old Andr`e once more, all strangeness and lust
and violence vanished. "Good night,
Angelique, you've nothing to be afraid of,
ever. More'sieur Vervene is quite right."
  "Yes ... yes thank you, Andr`e." She
forced a smile and then he was gone. She had
looked at him deeply, wanting to read the truth
behind his eyes. They were friendly, nothing else. But
she did not trust what she had seen. Even so,
she knew that she would have to make peace with him, would
accept his inevitable apologies--pretending
to forget everything and agreeing the attack was
a momentary madness--and would become friends again. On
the surface.
  She shuddered. In her innermost being she also
grasped that whatever he demanded, eventually she would
have to give. While he lived.

  Ori was trembling, hunched down against an
upturned fishing boat on the pebbled beach.
Twenty yards away was the edge of the surf, the
waves sibilant. "You're completely
baka," he gasped, his fury directed totally
against himself. Before he realized what he was doing he
had hammered on the shutters and then, appalled at
his stupidity, had rushed away, scaled the fence,
found the oar he used as camouflage, shouldered it
and loped across the roadway without being challenged,
gai-jin voices in his wake.
  Hiraga must be right, he thought, nauseated,
mixed up, his heart aching in his chest, shoulder
throbbing and a warm trickle of blood seeping from the
tear in the wound his headlong flight had caused.
Perhaps this woman really has sent me mad.
Madness to pound on the shutters--what good would that do
me? What does it matter if another pillows
her? Why should that enflame me, make my heart
roar in my ears? I don't own her or want
to own her, what does it matter if another
gai-jin takes her with or without violence? Some
women need a measure of violence to excite them,
like many men ... ah, wait, would it have been better
if she had fought me rather than welcoming me, however
drugged she was--or pretended to be?
  Pretended?
  This was the first time such a thought had entered his mind.
Some of his venom left him though his heart continued
to race and the ache behind his temples did not leave.
Could she have been pretending? Eeee, it's
possible, her arms embraced me and her legs
wrapped me and her body moved like no one has
ever moved--all pillow partners move sensually,
with moans and sighs and sometimes a few tears and,
"Oh how strong you are, how you exhaust me,
never have I had the privilege of such a man before
..." but every client knows that these are surface
words, learned by rote, part of their training, nothing
more and meaningless.
  She wasn't like that, every moment had meaning for me.
Whether she pretended or not doesn't matter--
she probably did, women are so filled with
guile. I don't care, I should not have
bludgeoned the shutter like a berserk fool,
revealing my presence and hiding place and
probably ruining forever my chance of gaining access
there again!
  Again his anger burst. His fist smashed the wood
of the hull. "Baka!" he croaked, wanting
to shriek it aloud.
  Footsteps on the pebbles. On guard, he
slid deeper into the shadows, the moon baleful,
then heard the voices of approaching fishermen,
chatting one with another, and cursed himself afresh for
not being more alert. Almost at once, a rough,
middle-aged fisherman came around the stern of the
boat and stopped. "Watch out! Who're you,
stranger?" the man said angrily, readying the
short mast he carried as a club. "What are you
up to?"
  Ori did not move, just glared up at him and
at the other two who moved up beside him. One was
also middle-aged, the other a youth not much older
than Ori himself. Both carried oars and fishing
tackle. "You do not ask those questions of your
betters," he said. "Where are your manners?"
  "Who're you, you're not samur--" The man
stopped, petrified, as Ori leapt to his
feet, the sword instantly in his hand, the blade
dangerously half out of its scabbard.
  "On your knees, scum, before I cut your
baka hearts out--a haircut does not make
me any less samurai!" Instantly the
fishermen fell to their knees, heads to the beach and were
bleating their apologies, no mistaking the
authority or the way the short sword was held.
"Shut up!" Ori snarled. "Where were you going?"
  "To fish, Lord, half a league out to sea,
please excuse us but, well, in the dark and your
hair not norm--"
  "Shut up! Get the boat in the water.
Move!"
  Once safe out to sea, now over his blinding
anger, the salt air cleansing, Ori looked
back at the Settlement. Lights still on in the
French and British Legations, the Struan
Building and the Club that Hiraga had identified
for him. Oil streetlamps along the praia, a
few windows glowing in other bungalows and
godowns, Drunk Town pulsating as normal
throughout the night, the gin shops never totally
sleeping.
  But all of his attention was on the
French Legation. Why? he kept asking himself.
Why should I have been so possessed with--jealousy,
that's the real word. An insane jealousy. To be
jealous over pillowing is baka!
  Was it because of what Hiraga had told me:
"Taira says their custom is like ours amongst
the leader class, a man does not pillow the
woman he will marry before marriage ..." which
means this tai-pan will not bed her and, as she is
promised, no one else has the right. Did I
smash the shutters to prevent that man pillowing her
--or was it to protect her?
  Or was it just because I wanted no other man
to enjoy her until I can again--that's even more
stupid, how could I ever tell? Was it because I was
the first? Does that make that pillowing different: because
you have possessed her uniquely? Remember,
Chinese have always believed virginity to be the most
powerful aphrodisiac between Heaven and Earth. Is
that why I did what I did?
  No. It was a sudden impulse. I believe
she is a wolf woman who must be killed--
preferably after I've pillowed her once more--for
me to escape her spell.
  But how and when? It must be now.
  Too dangerous to stay in the Settlement, or
Yoshiwara. Hiraga is bound to hear I have not
left. I am a dead man if he finds me.
Could I risk three more days, then, if I fail
to snare her, hurry off to Ky@oto with Hiraga
none the wiser? Safer to leave now. Which? "You,
old man, where do you live?"
  "Second Street, Fifth House, Lord,"
the fisherman stuttered, all of them deeply
afraid, long since realizing that this must be one of the
ronin who were hiding in the Settlement to escape the
Toranaga Enforcers.

                 

    Sunday, 19th October:
  Church bells were beckoning the faithful on this
nice crisp morning. "Not many bloody faithful
in Yokohama," Jamie McFay said
to Struan. McFay's shoulders and back were
aching, the church and the coming service not to his liking,
nothing like the austere Scottish
Presbyterianism of his childhood. "Not that
I'm a real churchgoer, not anymore," he said,
very much on guard, unsure how Struan
was going to be after their violent row the day before.
"My ma's still as strict as they come, three times
on Sunday!"
  "Like mine, though she's Church of England,"
Struan agreed heavily. He walked slowly and
badly, hunched over, leaning on his canes,
amid groups of men converging on the church that was
down the High Street and set back slightly in
its own garden on a choice lot facing the sea.
"The church is pretty though. Makes
Yokohama permanent."
  Holy Trinity, or Holy Titty as they
privately dubbed it, was the pride of the
Settlement. It had been consecrated last year
by the Bishop of Hong Kong. The steeple was
tall and the bell sweet-sounding, reminding all
ex-patriots of home--so very far away. Wood
and plaster and bricks from Shanghai. Neat
gardens and small cemetery with only seven
graves, sickness rare in Yokohama--unlike
Hong Kong with its plagues and the lethal Happy
Valley fever, mal-aria--all seven deaths
by misadventure, except one of old age.
Twenty years working in Asia were rare and men past
retirement age, rarer still.
  Again the bell tolled, not yet insistent, more
than enough time to take their places, the Noble House
pew in the first row. I need all the help I can
get, Struan was thinking fervently, never devout
though always a believer. I'm glad it's our
church more than the other traders'.
  The land and the building had been donated to the
Church of England by all traders. They had
enthusiastically voted the levy four hours after the
Yokohama Club had opened its doors for
business, the same day the Settlement was founded--
at McFay's insistence and on the orders of
Tess Struan, who guaranteed fifty percent
of the cost. She had also pledged to provide the
bell and had it cast in their new foundry in Hong
Kong. When Tyler Brock heard about it, not
to be outdone by his estranged and hated daughter,
he had ordered a stained-glass window from
London and pews of English oak.
  "Sunday church's all right, once a month,
Father used to say, but never in Mother's hearing."
Struan smiled bleakly. "When he was younger he
was as much a churchgoer as she is now ..." He
stopped a moment to gather his breath and stared out
to sea. The sea was choppy,
blue-grey, the sky speckled with cumulus. A
dozen or so merchantmen lay snug in the roads,
English predominately, one American, one
Russian, yesterday's mail steamer, the French
paddle steamer flagship wallowing at anchor, and the
21-gun steam frigate H.m.s. Pearl,
still without her foremast. "Feels naked without the
fleet, doesn't it?"
  "Yes and it does. Not many will miss prayers
today." McFay circled his head to ease the ache
in his neck.
  "How long do you think they'll be gone?"
  "A month is my bet ... 'morning Mrs.
Lunkchurch." Both raised their hats
politely, Struan awkwardly, as she sailed
past, bustled and bonneted, husband sweatily in
tow, his face dark with bruises. "What the
devil happened to him?"
  "Fighting," McFay said cautiously, still
trying to gauge Struan's humor--he had not
seen him or heard from him since yesterday except
to get a curt message this morning to join him for
their walk to church. He fell into step as Struan
started off again. "Seems he, Dmitri and a few
others decided to visit Drunk Town last
night for a Saturday night binge."
  "You mean punch-up?"
  "'fraid that was the basic idea. Dmitri,
well, he said they had a grand time."
  Struan noticed the sudden glint in
McFay's eyes. "Ah, you were there too,
Jamie?" he asked dryly, then smiled.
  McFay saw the smile and was greatly
relieved. "Well yes, Tai-pan, yes, I
went along ... but just to make sure Dmitri
didn't get into trouble."
  "Did he?" Struan asked with a sudden stab of
envy.
  "No, but och ay, Tai-pan, we had a grand
time."
  "You lucky fellow! Come on, Jamie,
tell all!"
  Jamie heard and saw the open friendliness and
camaraderie that he had been afraid he had lost
forever and beamed, his aches forgotten, angers
forgotten and worries over his future. "There was
a smashing cockfight at the Bull and Cock,
best we've had here, they've a new ring now and a
new Nagasaki beer that's better than our own
Highland Dark! Two army handlers were
pitted against two of our lads, Chandler Sykes
and Old Bloody."
  "Who?"
  "He's one of our retired seaman, a master
gunner, name of Charlie Bent, who paid off of
Lasting Cloud--the same gunner who blew
Wu Fang Choi's war junk out of the water for
your dad, back in '43. Now he's nicknamed
"Old Bloody" as he looks after the
abattoir. Well I backed him all the way,
Tai-pan, and won twenty-five pounds. Afterwards
we descended on the Yokopoko Palace--that's
the biggest tavern in Drunk Town, Army
mostly, the Navy go to the Friar Tuck and never
the twain shall meet." He laughed. "Lost a
tenner at roulette, another five at dice.
In no time at all there was the greatest
free-for-all, traders against the rest. I think
we won. Then home to bed though, er, a few,
repaired to Naughty Nellie's."
  "You too?"
  "Well, yes but only for a nightcap, her
champagne's the best and cheapest in Yokohama."
  "And the girls?"
  McFay laughed again. "Nothing like Mrs.
Fortheringill's Establishment for Young Ladies in
Hong Kong! There're about a dozen birds, most
from the East End via Hong Kong, a few from
Sydney in Australia, daughters of women
convicts who've served their time and stayed on.
They're all a bit grotty, and not to my
taste." Filled with bonhommie he greeted
passersby and added without thinking, "My needs are
more than well looked after by Nemi." He glanced
at Struan and saw the stretched face. His good
humor vanished and he cursed himself for mentioning
her. "You all right, Tai-pan?"
  "Yes, yes of course," Struan said,
abruptly filled with envy at the other man's
strength and virility, not loathing him for it, just
himself. "Can't bear being like this, Jamie, hate it.
Hate it! Christ, it's so difficult to be
patient. I've just got to, I know that." He
forced a smile. "Nemi? Oh yes, she seemed
a nice girl. Pretty." With a vast effort
Struan tore his mind off Shizuka and his
failure, his frantic need to succeed with
Angelique, and to weather the shoals ahead and coming
tempest his mother was bound to generate. One thing at a
time. Gear yourself to get through church, then
through the rest of the day until six o'clock when Ah
Tok will bring you the medicine: "Would you like a little
before you go to your temple, my son?"'
  "No thank you, Mother, once a day is enough.
The doctor said I should be careful."
  "What do foreign devils know?"'
  "Ayeeyah, I'm a foreign devil."
  "Ayeeyah, yes, but you're my son ..."
  Ah Tok's such an old biddy. But then I
can trust her. No harm in a little once a day.
I can quit anytime, anytime, he reassured
himself. Don't need it during the day though it
certainly helps. Got to decide about Mother's
letter, got to write her by tomorrow's mail. Got to.
  Her letter had been delivered by hand from the mail
ship by special courier, inevitably a relation
of their compradore, Gordon Chen. Again it had
had no "P.s. I love you." Again the
secret message had infuriated him:

Malcolm: Have you gone totally dotty?
Engagement party? After I warned you? Why on
earth did you totally disregard my letter and my
urgent summons to return? If it wasn't for
Dr. Hoag's medical report received today with the
unbelievable news I would have presumed you had
head injuries as well as the terrible sword
wounds. I have demanded our Governor take the
most stringent measures against these uncivilized
beasts and bring the violators to the Queen's
justice at once! If he doesn't, I
warned him personally that the whole force of the Noble
House will be arranged against this administration!
  Enough of that. It is VITAL that you return
to Hong Kong at once to make final three
matters--of course I am prepared to forgive your
transgression, you are still so very young, you have been through
a terrible experience and have fallen into the clutches
of an exceedingly clever woman. I thank God
you are gaining strength every day. From Dr. Hoag's
report, thankfully you should certainly be fit enough
to travel by the time you receive this (i have instructed
Dr. Hoag to return with you and hold him
personally responsible for your safety). I have
booked passage for you both on the mail ship--not
for her, deliberately.
  It is essential you come back QUICKLY
AND ALONE: first to formally become tai-pan.
yr grandfather left specific instructions, in
writing, that MUST be complied with before you
LEGALLY become tai-pan of Struan's whatever
your father or I leave to you by will. Before your father
died, in your absence, my son, he made me
swear what had to be sworn and that I would swear you
to these same conditions. This must be done quickly.
  Second: because we must decide at once
how to combat Tyler Brock's attack on
us--I mentioned before that he has the full support
of the Victoria Bank and today threatens
to foreclose on our promissory notes that will
ruin us if successful. Gordon Chen has
suggested a solution but it is terribly risky,
may not be put to paper, and requires the
tai-pan's signature and participation. My
stepbrother "Sir" Morgan Brock has just
arrived in Hong Kong and is flaunting his
knighthood that he only acquired by persuading his
heirless father-in-law to adopt him who then,
conveniently and almost at once thereafter, died.
  Was the poor man assisted? God forgive
me but I would not doubt it. Both he and Tyler
Brock openly claim that by Christmas they will have
us humbled and they will be in possession of our
Steward's box at the races in Happy
Valley. The voting for a new Steward was
yesterday. As per your grandfather's wishes on your
behalf I again blackballed him. God forgive
me but I hate my father so much I almost become
mad.
  Third: your entrapment! I could not believe
my ears about this "engagement party" until it was
confirmed. I hope by now, I pray God, your
good sense has returned and you realize what has
happened to you. Fortunately of course you cannot
marry without my approval and certainly not the
Catholic daughter of a runaway embezzler
(there are warrants out to seize him for debts).
In fairness I do understand you. Gordon Chen
explained how easy it would be for a youth like you to be
embroiled so do not despair. We have a plan that
will extract you from her toils and prove to you
conclusively that she is just a--sorry my son but
I have to be blunt--just a jezebel.
  When you marry your wife must be English,
God-fearing, never a heretic, a lady of good
family, trained and at ease in SOCIETY and
worthy to be your wife, bringing you a suitable
dowry and qualities to assist your future. When
the time comes you will have many suitable ladies to choose
from.
  By the same mail I have written Dr.
Hoag, and also McFay expressing my shock that
he allowed this engagement stupidity to happen. I
look forward to embracing you in a few days. your
loving Mother.

  Almost at once Jamie had rushed into the
room, white-faced. "She's heard!"
  "I know that. Never mind."
  "Jesus Christ, Malcolm, you can't just
say never mind!" McFay spluttered,
practically incoherent. He offered him the letter that
shook in his hand. "Here, read it for yourself."
  The letter, without any form of greeting, was just
signed Tess Struan:

Unless you have a satisfactory explanation why
you permitted my son (though he is to be
tai-pan you must know is still a minor) to become
engaged without first obtaining my approval--which you
MUST know would never be forthcoming for such an
unsuitable match, you will cease to head Struan's
in Japan at the end of the year. Put Mr.
Vargas in charge for the moment and return with my
son on the mail ship to settle this matter.

  Struan had angrily shoved the letter back.
"I'm not going back to Hong Kong yet--
I'll go when I choose."
  "Christ Jesus, Malcolm, if she
orders us back then we had better go. There're
reasons th--"'
  "No!" he had flared. "Understand? No!"
  "For God's sake, open your eyes to the
truth," McFay had flared back. "You are
under age, she is running the company and has been
for years. We're under her orders an--"'
  "I'm not under her orders, any orders.
Get out!"
  "I won't! Can't you see what she asks
is wise and no hardship. We can be back here in
two to three weeks, you have to get her approval
sometime, surely it's better to try now, it'll
clear the air for you and make our job easier
an--"'
  "No! And ... and I'm cancelling her
orders: I order you. I'm tai-pan of
Struan's!"
  "Christ, you must know I can't go against her!"
  Struan almost faltered in his steps
remembering the dreadful stab of pain in his loins as
he had thoughtlessly scrambled out of his chair to his
feet and shouted at McFay: "You fucking
listen, I remind you of your sacred oath to serve
the tai-pan, the tai-pan for Christ's sake,
whoever he is, the tai-pan, not his fucking mother!
REMEMBER?"'
  "But, don't y--"'
  "Who're you going to obey, Jamie? Me or
my mother?"' There had been a vast chasm between them and
more anger and more words, but he had prevailed. This
battle was no contest. The stipulation was written
into every document of appointment, to be signed and
settled under God's oath in accordance with their
founder's instructions.
  "All right, I agree!" McFay had said
through his teeth. "But I dem--sorry I ask the
right to write to her and tell her my new
orders."
  "Do that, by the mail ship, and while you're about
it, tell her the tai-pan orders you to stay here,
that only I can fire you, as I will by God if I
have any trouble--and that if I want to get engaged,
minor or no, that's up to me." Then he had
groped back to his chair, almost doubled up with
pain.
  "My God, Tai-pan," McFay said
weakly, "she'll dismiss me whether you like it or
not. I'm finished."
  "No. Not without my say-so, it's in our
bylaws."
  "Maybe. But like it or not, she can make my
life and yours a misery, like it or not."
  "No, you're only doing what I want.
You're within Dirk's law--and that's what governs
her above all else," he said, remembering the
times without number she had invoked the name of Dirk
Struan to his father, or to him, or his brothers and
sisters, on a point of business or morality
or on life itself. And didn't Father and Mother both
say a thousand times that I was to be tai-pan after
him, everyone, particularly Uncle Gordon
accepting that. Any formalities can wait, she's
just using that as an additional excuse to curb me--
Christ I've trained all my life for the job,
I know how to deal with her and I know what's wrong
here. "I'm tai-pan by God, and now ... now
if you'll excuse me, I, I've work to do."
  The moment he was alone he had shouted for Ah
Tok.
  Ayeeyah, that was one time I really needed the
medicine, it works so well and saved me all that
pain and anguish and gave me courage again and,
later, such a happy time with Angelique. Ah
my angel, back again in her suite next door
thank God, so near and delectable and warm and
near but oh and Christ, I wish when I thought of
her the ache wouldn't begin, and that ache would not lead
to the other pain and it's not yet midmorning with a
boring sermon and lunch to endure--and more than eight
hours until the next ...
  "Sorry about yesterday," McFay was saying.
"Very sorry."
  "I'm not, it brought matters out in the open and
settled them," he said with a curious strength.
"Now there's a real head to the company--I agree
my Father wasn't effective and spent most of the
last few years drunk, with Mother doing the best she
could which hasn't kept us ahead of Brock's--again
let's be honest they're stronger and richer and more
sound than we are and we'll be lucky to weather the
current storm. Take Japan--Japan's
hardly paying expenses."
  "Yes, short term, but long term it will be
profitable."
  "Not the way you've been running it so far.
Jappos are not buying any profitable goods from us.
We buy silk cloth and silkworms, a few
lacquer trinkets, what else? Nothing of
value. They've no industry and don't seem
to want any."
  "True, but then China took time to open up,
years. And there we've the opium, tea, silver
triangle."
  "True but China's different. China's a
cultured, ancient civilization. We've friends
there and, as you say, a trading pattern. My
point is we've got to hurry things up here
to survive, or we close it down."
  "As soon as Sir William sorts out the
Bakufu--"
  "The pox on that!" Struan's voice sharpened.
"I'm tired of being stuck in a chair and sick of
hearing people say we have to wait until Sir
William orders the fleet and army to do its
job. The next time there's a meeting with the
Bakufu I want to be there--or better still you
arrange a private one for me first."
  "But, Tai-pan ..."
  "Do it Jamie. That's what I
want. And do it quickly."
  "I don't know how that's possible."
  "Ask Phillip Tyrer's tame samurai,
Nakama. Better still arrange a secret
meeting then Phillip won't be compromised."
  McFay had given him the information that
"Nakama" had provided. "That's a good
idea," he said, meaning it, and, seeing the jutting
jaw and the fire he was warmed. Perhaps at long
last, he thought, here's someone who can make things
happen. "I'll see Phillip after church."
  "When's the next ship scheduled for San
Francisco?"
  "In a week, the Confederate merchantman,
Savannah Lady." McFay dropped his
voice cautiously, a group of other traders
passing by. "Our Choshu order goes with her."
  "Who could we trust to go with her for a special
mission?" Struan asked, putting his plan
into operation.
  "Vargas."
  "Not him, he's needed here." Again Struan
stopped, his legs aching, then hobbled to the side of the
promenade where there was a low wall, mostly to rest
but also to keep their conversation private. "Who
else? Has to be good."
  "His nephew, Pedrito--he's a sharp
lad, looks more Portugee than Vargas,
hardly any Chinese in his face, speaks
Portuguese, Spanish, English and
Cantonese--good at figures. He'd be
acceptable in either the North or the Confederacy.
What had you in mind?"
  "Book passage for him on that ship. I
want him to go with the order which we're going
to quadruple, also to ord--"
  "Four thousand rifles?" McFay gaped at
him.
  "Yes, also send a letter to the factory via
tomorrow's mail ship telling them to expect him.
She'll connect with the California steamer out of
Hong Kong."
  McFay said uneasily, "But we only got
a down payment of gold to cover two hundred--
we'll have to cover the whole order, that's factory
policy. Don't you think we'd be overextending
ourselves?"
  "Some people might think so. I don't."
  "Even with a shipment of two thousand--the
Admiral's hysterical against
importation of all arms and opium ... I know
he can't by law," McFay said hastily, "but if
he wants he can still seize a cargo on the
grounds of national emergency."
  "He won't find them or hear about them until
it's too late--you'll be too clever.
Meanwhile draft a letter to go with the order, and a
copy by the mail ship--do it yourself Jamie,
privately--asking the factory for special
service on this consignment, but also to make us their
exclusive agents for Asia."
  "That's a fine idea, Tai-pan, but I
strongly advise against upping the order."
  "Make it five thousand rifles, and
emphasize we'll negotiate a most
attractive deal. I don't want Norbert
to steal a march on us." Struan began walking
again, the pain worse now. Without looking at
McFay he knew what he was thinking and said,
edged, "There's no need to check with Hong Kong
first. Do it. I'll sign the order and the letter."
  After a pause McFay nodded. "Just as you
say."
  "Good." He heard the reluctance in
McFay's voice and decided that now was the time.
"We're changing our policy in Japan. They
like killing here, eh? According to this Nakama many of their
kings are ready to revolt against the Bakufu who
certainly aren't our friends. Good, we'll help
them do what they want. We'll sell them what
they want: armaments, some ships, even a gun
factory or two, in ever-increasing amounts--for
gold and silver."
  "And what if they turn these guns on us?"
  "Once will be enough to teach them a lesson, like
everywhere else on earth. We'll sell them
muskets, some breech-loaders, but no machine
guns, no big cannon or modern fighting
ships. We're going to give the customer what he
wants to buy."

  Angelique knelt and settled herself in the
tiny screened confessional, as best her voluminous
skirts would allow, and began the ritual, the
Latin words running together as was normal for those who
did not read or write the language but had
learned the obligatory prayers and responses
from childhood by constant repetition. "Forgive
me, Father, for I have sinned ..."
  On the other side of the screen, Father
Leo was more attentive than usual. Normally
he listened with half an ear, sadly, sure that his
penitents were lying, their sins unconfessed, their
level of transgression great--but no greater than
in other Settlements in Asia--and the penances he
ordered were merely paid lip service, or totally
disregarded.
  "So, my child, you have sinned," he said in his most
pleasant voice, his French heavily accented.
He was fifty-five, corpulent and bearded, a
Portuguese Jesuit and Believer, ordained
for twenty-seven of those years and largely content
with the crumbs of life he judged God permitted
him. "What sins have you committed this week?"
  "I forgot to ask the Madonna for forgiveness in
my prayers one night," she said with perfect
calm, continuing her pact, "and had many bad thoughts
and dreams, and was afraid, and forgot I was in
God's hands ..."
  At Kanagawa, the day after that night--
once she had reasoned a way out of her
catastrophe--she had knelt weeping before the
small crucifix she always carried with her.
"Mother of God, there's no need to explain what
has happened and how I've been sinned against
grievously," she had sobbed, praying with all the
fervor she could gather, "or that I've no one
to turn to, or that I need your help
desperately, or that obviously I can't tell
anyone, even at Confession, I daren't openly
confess what has happened. I daren't, it would
destroy the only chance ...
  "So please, on my knees I beg you,
may we have a pact: when I say at Confession:
I forgot to ask the Blessed Mother for forgiveness in
my prayers, it really means that I'm confessing
and telling everything that I've told you and you've
seen happen to me, together with the added little white lies
I may, I will have to tell to protect myself. I
beg forgiveness for asking, and beg your help,
there's no one else I can turn to. I know
you'll forgive me and know you'll understand because you are the
Mother of God and a woman--you will understand and know you will
absolve me ..."
  She could see Father Leo's profile behind the
screen and smell the wine and garlic on his breath.
She sighed, thanked the Madonna with all her
heart for helping her. "Forgive me Father for I have
sinned."
  "Those sins don't appear to be so
bad, my child."
  "Thank you, Father." She stifled a yawn,
preparing to accept her usual, modest penance, then
to cross herself and be absolved and to thank him and
to leave. Tiffin at the Club with Malcolm and
Seratard, siesta in my beautiful suite next
to Malcolm's, dinner at the Russian Leg--
  "What kind of bad thoughts did you have?"
  "Oh, just being impatient," she said without
thinking, "and not content to rest in God's Hands."
  "Impatient about what?"
  "Oh, with, impatient with my maid," she said
flustered, caught unawares, "and that, that my
fianc`e is not as fit, is not as well as I'd
like him to be."
  "Ah yes, the tai-pan, a fine young man but
grandson of a great enemy of the True Church.
Has he told you about him? His grandfather, Dirk
Struan?"
  "Some stories, Father," she said, even more
unsettled. "About my maid I was impat--"
  "Malcolm Struan's a fine young man, not like
his grandfather. You have asked him to become
Catholic?"
  The color went out of her face. "We have
discussed it, yes. Such a, such a discussion is very
delicate and, and of course may not be hurried."
  "Yes, yes indeed." Father Leo had heard the
intake of breath and sensed her anxiety. "And I
agree it is terribly important, for him and for
you." He frowned, his experience telling him the
girl was hiding much from him--not that that would be
unusual, he thought.
  He was going to leave the matter there, then
suddenly realized here was a God-given
opportunity both to save a soul and have a
worthwhile enterprise--life in Yokohama,
unlike in his beloved and happy Portugal, was
drab with little to do except fish and drink and eat and
pray. His church was small and dingy, his flock
sparce and ungodly, the Settlement a veritable
prison. "Such discussion may be delicate but it
must be pressed forward. His immortal soul is in
absolute jeopardy. I will pray for your
success. Your children will be brought up in Mother Church
--of course he has already agreed?"
  "Oh we have discussed it, too, Father," she said
forcing lightness, "of course our children will be
Catholic."
  "If they are not, you cast them into the
Eternal Pit. Your immortal soul will be at
risk as well." He was glad to notice her
shudder. Good, he thought, one blow for the Lord against the
Antichrist. "This must be formally agreed to before
marriage."
  Her heart was racing now, her head aching with
apprehension that she fought to keep out of her voice,
believing absolutely in God and the Devil,
Life Everlasting and Eternal Damnation.
"Thank you for your advice, Father."
  "I will talk to Mr. Struan."
  "Oh no, Father, please no," she said in
sudden panic, "that would be, I suggest that would be
very unwise."
  "Unwise?" Again he pursed his lips,
scratching absently at the lice that inhabited his
beard and hair and ancient cassock, quickly
concluding the possible coup of Struan's conversion was
a prize worth waiting for and needed careful
planning. "I will pray for God's guidance and that
HE will guide you too. But don't forget you are
a minor, as he is. I suppose, in the absence
of your father, Monsieur Seratard would legally be
considered your guardian. Before any marriage could
be performed or consummated permission must be
granted, and these and other matters settled for the
protection of your soul." He beamed, more than a
little satisfied. "Now, for penance, say ten
Hail Marys and read the letters of Saint John
twice by next Sunday--and continue to pray for
God's guidance."
  "Thank you Father." Thankfully she crossed
herself, her palms sweaty, and bowed her head for his
benediction.
  "In nomine Patri et Spiritu
sancti, absolvo tuum." He made the
sign of the cross over her. "Pray for me, my
child," he said with finality, ending the ritual, in his
mind already beginning his dialogue with Malcolm
Struan.

  At dusk Phillip Tyrer was sitting
cross-legged opposite Hiraga in a tiny
private room in the equally tiny restaurant that
was half hidden beside the house of the shoya, the
village elder. They were the only customers, and
this was the first real Japanese meal with a
Japanese host Tyrer had experienced. He was
hungry and ready to taste everything. "Thank you
invite me, Nakama-san."
  "It is my pleasure, Taira-san.
May l say that your Japanese accent is
improving. Please eat."
  On the low table between them the maid had set many
small dishes with different foods, some hot some
cold, on decorative lacquered trays.
Shoji screens, tatami mats, small sliding
windows open to the descending darkness, oil lamps
giving a pleasing light, flower arrangement in the
nook. Adjoining was another private room and,
outside these, the rest of the restaurant, not much more
than a corridor with stools that opened to an
alley that led to the street--charcoal cooking
brazier, sak`e and beer barrels, a cook and
three maids.
  Hiraga and Tyrer wore loose-belted
sleeping-lounging kimonos--Tyrer enjoying its
unaccustomed comfort and Hiraga relieved to get out
of the European clothes that he had worn all day.
Both had been bathed and massaged in the nearby
bathhouse. "Please eat."
  Awkwardly Tyrer used chopsticks. In
Peking, the Embassy had advised against eating
any Chinese foods: "... not unless you want
to get poisoned, old boy. These buggers really
eat dog, drink snake's bile, spoon up
insects, anything, and have an astounding but universal
belief, If its back faces heaven you can eat
it! Ugh!"
  Hiraga corrected the way to hold the
sticks. "There."
  "Thank you, Nakama-san, very
difficult." Tyrer laughed. "Will fat not
get eating theses."
  ""I will not get fat eating with these,""
Hiraga said, not yet weary of correcting
Tyrer's Japanese for he had found he enjoyed
teaching him. Tyrer was an apt pupil with a
remarkable memory and happy disposition--and very
important for himself, a continual fountain of
information.
  "Ah, sorry, I won't get fat eating
with these. What is, sorry, what are these
foods?"
  "This is what we call tempura, fish
fried in batter."
  "So sorry, what is "batter"?"
Tyrer listened attentively, missing many of the
words but understanding the gist, just as he knew the other
man would miss English words. We
speak more English than Japanese, he thought
wryly, but never mind. Nakama's a great teacher
and we seem to have made an accommodation which is
fine--without him I wouldn't be here, probably not
alive, either, and would certainly never have all the
face I gained with Marlowe, Pallidar and Wee
Willie Winkie, let alone the invaluable
intelligence he is supplying. Tyrer smiled.
It pleased him to be able to think of Sir
William now by his nickname when only a few
days ago he had been petrified of him.
"Oh, now I understand. Batter! We also
use batter."
  "This food to your liking, Taira-san?"
Hiraga asked, switching to English.
  "Yes, thank you." Whenever he could Tyrer
would answer in Japanese. "Thank for
everything, massage, bath, now caml, sorry,
now calm and happy."
  Some of the food he found exciting, tempura and
yakitori, bite-sized pieces of chicken that were
grilled with a sweet and salty sauce. Anago
turned out to be grilled eel with a warm
sweet-sour sauce he particularly liked.
Sushi, slivers of various raw fish of
different colors and textures on a ball of
rice he found difficult to swallow at first, but
when dipped in a mysterious salty sauce called
soy or soya they became palatable. After
all, he thought, Father did advise me to try
everything: "My son, since you insist on this
dramatic idea of becoming a Japanese
interpreter, then I advise you to hurl yourself
into their way of life and foods and so on--without
forgetting you're an English gentleman with
obligations, a duty to the Crown, the Empire and
to God ..."
  Wonder what the Old Man would say about
Fujiko. She's certainly part of their way of
life. Tyrer beamed suddenly and pointed with a
chopstick, "What's this?"
  "Oh sorry, Taira-san it's bad
manners point with the thin end of a chopstick.
Please use the other end. This is wasabeh."
Before Hiraga could stop him, Tyrer had picked
up the nodule of green paste and eaten it. At
once his sinuses caught fire and he gasped,
eyes watering, almost blinded. In time the
conflagration passed, leaving him panting. "My
Go'd," Hiraga said, copying Tyrer
and trying not to laugh, "Wasabeh do not eat, just
put 'ritt'er--sorry, word very hard for me--just
put some in the soy to make spicy."
  "My mistake." Tyrer gasped,
momentarily strangled. "My God, that's
lethal, worse than chilli! Next time I
careful."
  "You very good for man who begin, Taira-san.
And you 'rearn Japanese o'rr so quick, very good."
  "Domo, Nakama-san, domo." Same
with you in English. Pleased to be complimented,
Tyrer concentrated on being more deft. The next
morsel he tried was tako, sliced octopus
tentacle. It tasted like slimy rubber even with a
touch of soy and wasabeh. "This is very tasty,
I like this very much."
  I'm starving, he was thinking. I'd like triples
of the chicken, another bowl of rice, twenty more of the
tempura prawns, and Hiraga eats like a
baby. Never mind, I'm being entertained by a
samurai, it's not a week since he helped
get us out of the Yedo Legation without an international
incident, not six weeks since I first met
Andr`e, yet I can already talk a little
Japanese, already know more about their customs than
most traders who have been here since the beginning.
If I can keep this up I'll be gazetted as
an official interpreter in a few months and in
line for the official salary: Four hundred pounds
a year! Hooray, or Banzai as a
Japanese would say. At the present rate of
exchange I can easily afford another pony but
before that ...
  His heart quickened.
  Before that I'll buy Fujiko's contract.
Nakama's promised to help so I'll have no
trouble. He promised. Perhaps we'll begin tonight--
thank God, Fujiko's back from visiting her
grandmother. I suppose I really shouldn't on a
Sunday, but never mind. Karma.
  He sighed. Between Andr`e and Nakama he had
discovered that word and the marvelous way it became a
panacea for all happenings, good or bad, over
which you had no control. "Karma!"
  "What, Taira-san?"
  "Nothing. Food's good."
  "Food's good," Hiraga mimicked him.
"Good, thank you, I p'reased." He called for
more beer and sak`e. The shoji slid back and the
drinks appeared on a tray carried by a
merry-faced maid who beamed at Hiraga,
smiled shyly at Tyrer. With hardly a thought,
Hiraga caressed her rump. "How would you like
it Over the Mountain?"
  "Eeee, you naughty man! Over Mountain?
Oh no, not me, nor Under, but I might Play
the Flute for a gold oban!"
  They both laughed at the sally--one gold oban
being outrageously expensive, the fee a
courtesan of the first class might charge for such a
service. The maid poured the sak`e, filled
Tyrer's mug and left.
  "What she say, Nakama-san?"
  He smiled. "So sorry, difficu't
exp'rain, not words enough yet. Just joke,
man-woman joke, you understand?"
  "Wakarimasu. Church today, you like?" With
Sir William's approval and the avid consent
of the Reverend Michaelmas Tweet he had
sneaked Hiraga up to the minstrel's gallery.
Dressed in his new Western clothes, made
to order by the Chinese tailor with his usual
unbelievable speed, and beaver top hat,
Hiraga had passed as Eurasian and was hardly
noticed. Except by Jamie McFay who had
winked discreetly.
  "Church good, and your exp'rain too,"
Hiraga said, but inside he was still trying to sift
Tyrer's information into perspective, along with the
astonishing sight of all these grown men, and two
revolting-looking women, singing in unison,
getting up, sitting down, solemnly droning out
prayers, bowing their heads to their very strange God
who, after the service, Tyrer had explained was
actually three people, the Father, his Son who was
crucified like a common criminal, and a kami.
"So ka?"' Hiraga had said perplexed.
"So, Taira-san, woman name Madonna who
not God has son God--but she not God--and she
pi'rrow with kami who not God but like hatomoto of
God with wing who not husband, husband who o'rso not
God, but father is, so father of her son is grandfather,
neh?"'
  "No, there was no pillowing. You see ..."
  Again he listened, eventually pretended to understand
so he could question Taira about the enmity of the two
churches for he had noticed that Ori's woman was
not present and had asked why. Two churches,
equally powerful, constantly at war! And Ori
wanted me to give up. Baka!
  And when, head aching from concentration, he had
discovered the reason for the schism--and the resulting
scale of hatred and mass killings and universal
wars--he knew for certain in some areas gai-jin were
totally mad, but oh so vulnerable: the split was
only because an old bonze called 'Ruther,
three hundred odd years before, had decided on
a different interpretation of some minor point of
dogma that had been invented by another bonze
fourteen or fifteen centuries before him. This
man, clearly another lunatic, had decreed,
amongst other things, that poverty was to be sought, and
no pillowing with women would, after death, send you forever
to somewhere called Heaven, where there was no sak`e,
no food and no women, and you were a bird.
  Barbarians are beyond belief. Who could want
to go to such a place? Any one could see at once
that old bonze was like any other ambitious,
disgruntled fool who, after a lifetime of
pretending to be chaste, just wanted to have a wife or
concubine openly like any ordinary sensible bonze
or person.
  "Taira-san," he had said weakly:
"Need ba'f, massage, sak`e, you also, then
food. Fo'rrow p'rease."
  At first he had been worried that he had
proffered the invitation. Now the village elder, the
shoya, would discover he could speak English.
  "Eeee, how wonderful to speak gai-jin, I
wish I did, Otami-san!" the shoya had
chortled with open admiration. "May I tell you
again that I support sonno-joi, and also I have
assigned the cleverest of my sons to a gai-jin
bonze with orders to pretend to convert to their
ridiculous beliefs so he can learn their
language and their ways."
  "You will make sure the servants are
safe?"'
  "You will be protected like one of my family.
For extra safety I suggest you should hire the
whole restaurant and order this Taira to speak
only Japanese in the bathhouse. You say
learns quickly?"'
  "V."
  "Your secrets are safe with me.
Sonno-joi!"
  Hiraga smiled grimly remembering the
fervor with which the shoya had echoed him, believing him
not at all. I wonder what he would do if he
knew of our plan to burn all
Yokohama. He would shit. But before even cleaning
himself he would run to the Bakufu and bash his head
to the earth in his haste to serve them and betray me.
Baka!
  Tyrer was still eating voraciously. Though still
hungry Hiraga toyed with his food following
accepted Japanese custom and training, of
disciplining oneself to be satisfied with little, there being more
hungry times than abundant, to bear cold and
pain with fortitude, there being more bad days than good,
more cold than warmth so best be prepared. Less
is better than more. Except for sak`e. And
fornication. He smiled. "Sak`e!
Taira-san, kampai!"
  This flask was soon gone. He pressed
Tyrer to drink, pretending it was an important
Japanese custom to toast each other. Soon
Tyrer was happily telling about gai-jin wars, the
extent of the British Empire, about the goods they
manufactured and the amounts thereof. Because of
Tyrer's sincerity--possible sincerity--and his
"I swear it's the God's truth!"--he
decided to accept the information, however frightening or
preposterous until proven false. An hour's
study of Tyrer's school atlas and maps had
truly shocked him.
  "But, p'rease, how can so 'ritter country
'rike Ing'rand ru're so many?"
  "Lots of reasons," Tyrer said, warm and
loose and pleased with himself and, forgetting for a moment
to use simple words and ideas, he went on
guilelessly, "lots of reasons, because of our
superior education--superior learning, you understand?
--a superior heritage, a wise and benevolent
Queen and our unique and special form of
government, our Parliament, which has given us
superior laws and freedoms. At the same time
we're blessed, we're an island fortress, the
sea protects us, our fleets control the
sea-lanes for trade so we've been able
to develop better skills in peace and quiet,
to invent and experiment, we trade more therefore we've
more capital, Nakama-san, more money than
anyone else ... and we're very clever at
"divide and rule"--that's an old Roman
law ..." he laughed and finished the flask, "and,
most important of all, I've told you before,
we've twice the number of cannon, ships and
fire power than the next two countries--half
the world's ships are British, with
British crews and British gunners."
  So many words and ideas I don't understand,
Hiraga thought, his head reeling. Romans? Who
are they?
  If half of what Taira says is true,
no, a hundredth part, then it will take decades
to catch up with them. Yes, he thought, but in time we
will catch them. We are an island too. Better
than them this is Land of the Gods, man for man we
are tougher, stronger, better fighters, we've
discipline and more courage and, most of all we must
win eventually because we're not afraid to die!
  Eeee, even today I can see ways to twist them
that I could not have conceived a few days ago.
"Honto," he muttered.
  ""Honto," Nakama-san? The truth?
What's true?"
  "Just think about what you say. So much truth.
P'rease, you say ear'rier ... Kampai!"
  "Kampai! It time visit Yoshiwara,
neh?" Tyrer stifled a contented yawn, weary
of questions, but feeling grand.
  "I not forget, Taira-san." Hiraga hid
a smile. He had already arranged that Fujiko
would not be available this evening. "Finish sak`e,
last question, then go. P'rease, you say ear'rier about
machines making machines? How is possib're?"
  Tyrer launched into another enthusiastic
answer, saying the British were leaders in what was
nicknamed the Industrial Revolution: "The steam
engine, railways, steel and iron ships,
spinning Jenny, seed planters, mass
production, harvesters, are all our inventions,
sixty-pounders, submersibles, anesthetics, new
medicines, navigation--four years ago we laid
the first telegraph wire across the Atlantic, a
thousand leagues or more," he said grandly, deciding
not to mention the cable had burnt out within a month and,
soon, another had to be laid in its place.
"We've invented electric generators, gas
lighting ..."
  Soon Hiraga was giddy from the effort of
concentration, and his desperate wish to understand everything
when he understood almost nothing, but also because he could not
comprehend why an official as important as
Taira would answer any question an enemy would ask,
forof course we are enemies.
  I must learn English more quickly, I must. I
will.
  A gentle tap on the door and the
shoji slid back. "Please excuse me,
Otami-san," the maid said, "but the shoya begs
a moment of your time."
  Hiraga nodded briefly, told Tyrer he
would return in a moment and followed the maid out
into the alley that was empty and then into the busy
street. The few pedestrians who appeared
to notice him, bowed politely as to a merchant and
not to a samurai as the shoya had ordered. Good.
  The shoya was waiting in an inner room,
kneeling behind the table, his arm resting comfortably on
an armrest. A cat was curled beside him. He
bowed. "So sorry to disturb you, Otami-san, but
in case this gai-jin understands our language
better than he pretends, I thought it best
to speak here."
  Hiraga frowned, sat on his heels and bowed
back, all attention. "Yes, Ryoshi-san?"
  "There are several matters you should know,
Otami-sama." The strong-faced man poured
green tea into little cups from the miniature iron
teapot. The tea was superb, as rare as the
eggshell cups, aromatic and delicate.
Hiraga's foreboding increased. The shoya sipped
again then took a scroll from his sleeve and spread
it out. It was another copy of the woodcut poster:
The Bakufu offers two koku reward for this
murdering revolutionary of many aliases one of which
is Hiraga ...
  Hiraga picked it up, pretending this was the first
time he had seen it. Noncommittally he
grunted and handed it back.
  The older man put the edge to the candle flame.
Both watched as the paper curled and became ash,
both knowing that with his new haircut and rapidly
thickening stubble Hiraga's disguise was very good.
"The Bakufu become fiends in pursuit of our
brave shishi."
  Hiraga nodded but said nothing, waiting.
  Absently the shoya stroked the cat and it
purred softly. "It is said Lord Yoshi is
sending an emissary to negotiate with the chief
gai-jin for guns. No doubt a Lord of his high
rank would offer higher prices than, than Choshu
emissaries." He added delicately,
"Gai-jin will sell to the highest bidder."
  Hiraga had heard about the Choshu samurai
visiting the Noble House from Raiko--almost
everyone in the Yoshiwara was aware of the negotiations
--and he was sure if he knew their real
names he would certainly know the men personally or
their families. Only a year or so ago a
stepbrother, who also had gone to the same English
school in Shimonoseki, had been one of the team
sent to buy the first hundred guns. Curious,
Hiraga thought, that it should be to the same company
owned by this tai-pan who will soon be dead, both he
and his woman and this whole cesspit of evil.
"Gai-jin have no honor."
  "Disgusting." Another sip of tea. "In
Yedo Castle there is much activity. They say
the Shogun and the Imperial Princess plan
to leave for Kyoto in a week or two."
  "Why should they do that?" Hiraga asked,
pretending uninterest that fooled neither of them.
  The older man chuckled. "I do not know,
Otami-san, but it is very curious that the
Sh@ogun should leave his lair now to travel many
dangerous miles to visit the lair of many
enemies when, since the beginning, he has always
sent a flunky." The cat stretched and he
tickled her stomach, adding thoughtfully, "The
roju are increasing taxes in all Toranaga
lands to pay for any amounts of cannon and weapons
that can be bought--except by Satsuma, Tosa and
Choshu."
  Hiraga sensed the shoya's underlying anger,
though none showed, or his own amusement: What are
peasants and merchants for if not to pay taxes?
"Unless the Son of Heaven can use his
Heaven-granted power, the Bakufu will plunge
Nippon into eternal civil war again."
  "I agree."
  Hiraga was thinking, I wonder how much you
really agree, old man. He put that aside
to ponder how to push the Bakufu and Toranaga
Yoshi from their course. Akimoto should go at
once to Yedo and the House of Wisteria, we
haven't heard from Koiko or her mama-san for
days--perhaps we should go togeth--
  "Last, it seems your shishi friend, Ori-san,
did not leave for Ky@oto as planned," the shoya
said conversationally.
  Hiraga's eyes went flat, almost
reptilian. The shoya suppressed a shudder.
Instantly aware, the cat was erect in one
smooth movement, watching warily. Hiraga
broke the silence. "Where is he?"
  "In that part of the Settlement where the low-class
gai-jin live, drink and fornicate."

  Near midnight Andr`e Poncin knocked on
the door of the House of the Three Carp. At
once the doorkeeper admitted him. Raiko
welcomed him and soon they were drinking sak`e,
discussing the latest news of the Yoshiwara and
Settlement--she was a source of much intelligence
for him as he was for her--in their usual mixture
of Japanese and English.
  "... and the Enforcer Patrol searched every house,
Furansu-san! As though we would hide
criminals! It is against Yoshiwara rules.
We know how to keep our rice bowls full:
by promoting peace and avoiding trouble. Enforcers are
still at the main gate, glowering at every passerby."
Raiko fanned herself remembering her narrow
escape and wished that she had never invited shishi
to favor her house. It's time they all went
elsewhere, she thought, Enforcers and shishi, however much
I like Hiraga. "I wish they would go away."
  "What criminals look for?" Andr`e asked.
  "Traitors, ronin usually. But anyone who
is against them is a traitor. Ronin, they are
their usual prey."
  "Bakufu? Can Bakufu be throw out?
Revolution?"
  She laughed softly and emptied the flask and
began another. "The Bakufu are like lice in a
prison--you destroy a thousand and only make
room for a hundred thousand more. No, the Bakufu
and Sh@ogunate are Nippon and with us forever."
  "Tonight Taira-san here?"
  She shook her head. "The girl he wanted was
not available, I offered another but he refused and
left. Curious, neh? A curious young man
in many ways, though possibly a good customer.
Thank you for introducing him to my poor House."
  "This Japanese Sensei, teacher, samurai
Taira has find--who is he, Raiko?"
  "I don't know, so sorry, but I've heard
he's a Yedo-man and lives in the Settlement,
in the village."
  "Taira-san, he talk Fujiko about him?"
  "She never mentioned it, but then I did not ask
her. Next time, perhaps by next time I will know,
Furansu-san."
  Andr`e did not believe her, but never mind, he
thought, when she's ready she'll tell me. "The
medicine. It arranged?"
  "Of course, whatever I can do
to help a favored client is my purpose in
life."
  He took out the pair of pearl earrings and
laid them on the table. Her eyes glittered.
She made no move to pick them up but he was
sure she had instantly weighed them mentally,
deciding on their quality, cost and resale
value. "I asked to give these as present," he
said pleasantly and she smiled prettily,
pretending to be overwhelmed though already aware
payment would be in jewelry which could not be offered for
sale in Yokohama. Her fingers trembled as she
reached for them. He forestalled her, picking them up
and pretending to examine them closely.
  His plan for Angelique had worked
perfectly. Servants from the Noble House had
scoured the streets to no avail. Her anxiety
and tears had been genuine, and she had whispered
privately: "Oh Andr`e, did I do the
correct thing? Malcolm was really very upset--
I had no idea they were so expensive."
  "But he told you just to sign for whatever you
wanted, didn't he? Not your fault that you
didn't ask the price--he liked his cuff
links, didn't he?"'
  "Yes, but Andr`e ..."
  "There will be enough left over in case it's needed
--a credit against any eventuality,
Angelique."
  Andr`e smiled to himself and turned his full
attention to Raiko. "Value many times cost of
medicine."
  "The buying price, certainly. But I must
send them to the Yedo or Nagasaki Yoshiwara.
A difficult sale, but please do not worry,
I will help you to be rid of an unwanted child."
  "Not mine," he said sharply.
  "Ah so sorry, please excuse me," she
said, believing him. Good, I was afraid it was
his, she told herself, greatly relieved. I
want no more complications with this man. "It is not
my business."
  "Just help for friend of friend. In Drunk Town."
  "Please excuse me, so sorry."
  He smiled without humor. "You know pearl. This
value fifty times cost of medicine."
  She kept her smile in place and her voice
cooing but inside she was gnashing her teeth. "I will
have them valued. Of course they are worth more than
the cost of the medicine."
  "Of course." He held his palm flat and
she took them. The pearls were almost black, Sea
Island pearls. She touched them to her teeth
to feel if they were cold and carefully bit on them
but they did not mar. Satisfied now that they were
genuine and rich, she said lovingly, "The price,
old friend?"
  "Price is: all medicine, even if first time
fail. What necessary if drink fail, understand?
What need ... whatever need to stop child. Yes?"
  "Yes," she agreed happily, knowing this to be
a marvelous bargain. "A guaranteed ...
elimination, termination."
  "Plus twenty gold oban," he added, and was
delighted to see her face twist with real horror
though this was less than a third of what she would
squeeze from the sale--the setting was of little value
but he had made sure the Chinese jeweler only
used the finest pearls. She groaned and cursed and
they bargained back and forth, both enjoying the
encounter, both knowing that the real cost of the medicine and
medical advice was hardly significant to a
brothel mama-san. Soon they were close to making
a deal and then, of a sudden, her mood changed and
she stared at him strangely, liking him, so sad
for him, and thought: Should I interfere with karma?
  "What?" he asked suspiciously.
  "Let me think a moment, Furansu-san."
  Later, in an entirely different voice,
warm and soft as in the old days when he had been
her first customer and had lavishly wined and dined the
whole House to celebrate their opening, she said,
"Since we met, much water has flowed under many
bridges, lots of good times and laughter in our
Floating World and, as it is in this life, also
sadness and a lake of tears, not of my choosing.
Suddenly I remembered the last time we bargained
like this was over Hana's contract."
  His face settled into a mask. "Not talk about
Hana."
  "Ah, so sorry, I would like to, please, because
I may have a solution to her."
  "There none," he said angrily. "No cure,
Hana dead, Hana nothing do with pearls!"
  "True. Please be calm and listen. Perhaps,"
she said gently, "perhaps I could find another
Hana, similar, but one who already has the
Chinese disease."
  "Not possible," he burst out, shocked.
"Disease very bad, very bad, ugly."
  "Yes, near the end," she said patiently.
"Many times nothing shows for years. You are not yet
ugly, nothing shows with you, Furansu-san--it
may be years before that happens. It depends on
your karma. I should seek such a one?"
  He started to speak, stopped and shook his head.
  "Listen, if I could find new Hana, and then
if ..."
  "Not possible!"
  "... if you approve her, and she approves
you, you could be together until--until you decide
..." Raiko shrugged. "Never mind the future,
today is today and that is the rule of our Floating
World. You would keep the girl here, I would build
you a new house, the other naturally we
destroyed, you treat her like Hana in every way,
same contract price, same monthly money for
clothes and lodging, and she is for you only."
  Her eyes bored into him and he knew she could
see into his soul, see him writhing with a
frantic, sudden hope and craving to accept that which
would release him from torment--the news of his karma
had travelled with the speed of light, now every house
barred to him, politely oh so politely but still
barred for pillowing, only Drunk Town possible
--yet be a never-ending Damocles sword over
him forever. And even worse, there was no lessening of
his sexual urge but a heightening, a greater
obsession to pillow than before, one that had already
driven him to the insanity of two nights ago with
Angelique, not that he did not still desire her,
he did, more than ever, and knew without a release
he would try again and would not fail next time.
Blessed Mother, help me, he thought near tears,
I do not want to infect her too.
  "There is another possibility," Raiko was
saying, her gaze curious. "We can discuss that
later. Now Hana."
  "Not-talk-about-Hana!"
  "I have to, Furansu-san. Now. You
wanted to know how she died, neh?" Raiko saw
his eyes focus and his breathing almost stop. "After you
ran out into the night and she, weeping, told me the
reason, I was as shocked as you and ordered her out
of the House and cursed her even though she was like my
own daughter. Of course you were right and you should have
killed her not just hit her before you left, you are right
and of course her mama-san should have told me, and
she should have told me the mom--"
  "Speak, speak slow ... more slow."
  "Please excuse me but it is very hard
slowly, but she should have told me the moment she
knew. I was furious and left her to try to catch
up with you but failed. Then one of the maids ... it
was Mieko. Mieko rushed in to say that Hana
had tried to hara-kiri ..."
  Raiko was perspiring now. This was by no means the
first attempted suicide she had been involved
in. There had been dozens during her forty-five
years as apprentice, courtesan and mama-san
--she had even been born in the Willow World,
her mother a specialist courtesan of the second
rank. Many suicides were successful, few by the
knife, most by poison or drowning, some dual
suicides between lovers, the man always
impoverished, even samurai. But Hana's had
been the worst.
  When she had rushed into the room she found the
girl in agony, weeping and helpless, her neck
slashed several times but no artery or vein severed
and the windpipe only nicked. A little air bubbled
from the cut that bled badly but not badly enough. She
was crumpled on the futons, knife nearby, but
her hand could not grip it and each time she tried
to lift it it would slip from her grasp, all the time
weeping and choking and retching, begging forgiveness and
crying out, Help me ... help me ... help
me ...
  "She was beyond all wish for life,
Furansu-san," Raiko said sadly. "I've
seen too many not to know. If she had lived through that
attempt she would have tried again and again, without
ceasing. In this world, surely in ours, there does
come a time when it is good and wise to go beyond. We
put animals out of misery--it is right to give the
same relief to a person. So we helped her.
We calmed her and cleaned her and sat her up and
she had time to say, Namu Amida Butsu,
then I held the knife to her throat and
peacefully Hana fell on it. That is how she
died."
  "You ... you kill ... part ... part kill
her?"
  "It was my duty as her mama-san," Raiko
said simply. Again she hesitated, sighing. No
need for more tears. Those had been shed long since.
I have none left. How many times when I was her
age, hating my life and the way I had to earn my
rice, did I not contemplate the same
escape, even once cutting my
wrists, to be succored and saved by my mama-san
who, when I was well, beat me unmercifully.
But she was right, my mama-san, as I was right, because
she knew I was not serious as Hana was serious,
and now I cannot even remember the face of the boy
she had forbidden me, only that he was a poet.
"Before she died Hana asked me to apologize
again for her to you. To beg your forgiveness for her."
  "You ... do you ... forgive, forgive?"
  What a strange question, she thought, startled. "That
Hana was like last year's cherry blossom
scattered by the wind, no need to forgive or not
to forgive. Just a petal of the Willow World. She
existed but did not. You understand?"
  In turmoil he nodded, not comprehending all the
words, but understanding what she had done and why. He
hated her and blessed her, was relieved and sad and
suicidal and filled with hope. "Three men,
three who before me. Who?"
  "I do not know, so sorry, except they were
Japanese. Truly," she told him, her
eyes clean, the names buried in her most secret
heart, waiting to use if necessary, for or against the
Bakufu. "About these," she opened her hand. The
pearls glowed in the oil light, enticingly.
"Let us agree that I give you one third of
whatever I get from the sale, plus all
medicines and whatever else is necessary. A third
would be ..." She stopped as friend in Drunk
Town fell into place.
  The medicine is for the woman who is to marry the
tai-pan, she told herself excitedly. Wasn't
it she who was supposed to have lost some jewelry
yesterday that I thought nothing of. It must be her, the
pearls confirm it ... and if it's her, eeee, the
abortion must be without his approval or knowledge or
surely Jami-san would be the intermediary, not
Furansu-san.
  "A third would be fair," she said, and was going
to add smugly, to the young gai-jin woman who is
to marry the tai-pan, but seeing Furansu-san
staring gloomily into his cup, decided there was no
need yet to divulge she had deduced the
"who."
  Eeee, tonight has been most profitable, she
thought gleefully. Knowledge of a secret abortion by such
an important lady to bury, or to tell, could
be extremely valuable, to the lady herself, before or
after she marries, or to this tai-pan who is as
rich as Adachi of Mito, before or after
he marries, or even to one of his many enemies.
  Next: through Hiraga I have this Taira
firmly stuck to Fujiko's Jade Gate--
what is it about the girl that attracts Round
Eyes to her? And last but not least, the solution
to Furansu-san, my precious gai-jin spy,
presented herself.
  Raiko wanted to shout with joy but, carefully,
she retained her most modest, sincere look.
"A third? Furansu-san?"
  Bleakly he looked up at her, nodded his
agreement.
  "You have told the Lady there is a risk?"
  "What risk? Raiko say medicine good most
times."
  "It is, most times. But if the drink does not
succeed, we ... let us not worry about that now.
Let us hope Buddha smiles on her and it is
her karma to have an easy release, then to enjoy the
good things in life." She looked at him
steadily. "And you also. Neh?"
  He stared back at her.



                 

    Thursday, 6th November:
  Dearest Colette: The weeks have rushed
by, and tomorrow is my special day, Angelique
wrote, aglow with expectation, I feel so good
I can hardly believe it. I sleep
marvelously, my cheeks are rosy, everyone
compliments me and my figure is better than
ever ... No signs, nothing, she thought.
Nothing. Breasts a little tender but that's just
imagination--and tomorrow all will be over.
  She was sitting at the bureau in her suite
facing the bay, the tip of her tongue between her
lips, far too cautious to write anything that could
possibly compromise her. What a lucky omen
it's his day for my new beginning.

  Tomorrow is St. Theodore's day, he's my
new patron saint. You see, Colette,
by marriage I become British (not English because
Malcolm is Scots and part English) and St.
Theodore is one of their oh so few saints. He
became British too (he was a Greek)
twelve hundred years ago and rose
to be Archbishop of Canterbury ...

  Her steel-tipped pen hesitated as that name
brought phantoms from the mists but she would not
acknowledge them and they sank back into the depths
again.

... that means he was like the pope of the British
Isles. He reformed the Church, cast out
evildoers and heathen practices, was oh so holy
and kind, particularly to women, lived to be an
astonishing eighty-eight and altogether a wonderful man
of the True Church. I'm celebrating by having a
special fast day, then in three days a party!
  Father Leo told me about him. Ugh! I
really don't like him, stinky as he is (i have
to use a pomander handkerchief in the confessional--he
would make you faint, dear Colette). Last
Sunday I had the vapors and will certainly miss
this Sunday too. Do you remember how we used
to do that when we were at school, though how we
avoided a scolding I'll never know.

  Thoughts of Colette and school and Paris
distracted her for a moment and she stared out of the window
at the ocean, slate grey and stormy with a sharp
wind creating seahorses that ran ashore to woosh
up the beach a hundred yards away, the other
side of the promenade--merchantmen at anchor,
bum boats loading or unloading, the only
warship, the frigate Pearl, resplendent with
her new mast and new paint steaming for her mooring,
just back from Yedo.
  But Angelique did not really see any of
it, her eyes beguiled by the rosy future her
mind was promising. Here, in her suite, it was
warm and calm with no drafts, the windows well
fitting, a fire blazing in the fireplace, with
Malcolm Struan dozing comfortably in a tall
red velvet chair, papers, letters and invoices in
his lap and scattered about his feet. The connecting
door was open. Her door to the corridor
unlocked. This was their new custom. Safer, both
had agreed, plenty of time in the future to be
private.
  Some days he would arrive early and conduct his
business from her boudoir until noon when he would
doze a few minutes until lunch; sometimes he
would stay in his own suite and some days he would
hobble downstairs to the offices below.
He would always say she was always welcome there but
she knew that was only a politeness. Downstairs
was masculine domain. She was delighted he was
working--McFay had told her that since "the
tai-pan has taken charge, everyone's more
diligent, we've big plans hatching and our
company's humming ..."
  And so was she. No fear for the morrow. On the
contrary, she was looking forward to seeing Andr`e in the
evening at the Legation. Together they had hatched an
excuse and she would move back there tomorrow for three
days while her rooms were repainted, and new
curtains made for the windows and four-poster that she
had chosen from silks in their warehouse:
  "But, Angel," Struan had said,
"we're only here for a few more weeks, the
expense really isn't--"'
  A laugh and a kiss had changed his mind. La,
I begin to love him and adore the game of getting
my own way.
  She smiled and began to write again:

Colette darling, I've more energy than
I've ever had. Riding every day--no excursions which
make the Settlement restricting--but lots of
galloping around the racecourse with Phillip
Tyrer, Settry (pallidar), who's the best
rider I've ever seen, sometimes with French and
English cavalry officers, and not forgetting poor
Marlowe who is turning out to be the most dear man
but not, I'm afraid a horseman. They all
left three days ago to go to Yedo where Sir
William and the Ministers are having THE
MEETING with the native Cabinet and their king
called SH@OGUN.
  Malcolm is getting better but oh so
slowly, he still walks badly but is wonderful--
except on mail days (twice monthly) when
he's furious with everything and everyone, even me.
It's only because there are always letters from his mother (i
begin to hate her) who complains bitterly that he
stays here and doesn't return to Hong Kong.
Three days ago was worse than usual. One
of the Noble House clippers arrived, this time with
another letter and a verbal summons delivered by the
Captain who said: "I'd appreciate it,
sir, if you could come aboard the moment we've
unloaded the special cargo--our orders are
to escort you and Dr. Hoag to Hong Kong rightly
smartly ..."
  I've never heard such language,
Colette! I thought poor Malcolm would have
apoplexy. The Captain crumpled and fled.
Again I implored Malcolm to let us do what
she wants but ... he just growled, "we'll go
when I decide to go, by God. Don't mention it
again!" Yokohama is VERY tedious, and I'd
really like to return to Hong Kong and civilization.
  To pass the time I have been reading everything I
can lay my hands on (newspapers, apart from
fashion and Paris life are really quite interesting
I was surprised to find, and they make me
realize what a scatterbrain I am).
  But I must prepare for all the soirees I
must give for my husband, to entertain his
important guests--as well as their wives. So
I intend to learn about trade, opium and tea and
cotton and silkworms ... But one has to be
SO careful. The first time I tried to talk about
an article relating to the awful state of the French
silk industry (which is why Jappaner
silkworms are so valuable) Malcolm said,
"Don't you worry your pretty head about that,
Angel ..." I could get NOT one word in even
sideways, in fact he was quite irritable when I
said Struan's could start a silk factory in
France. ...
  Oh dearest Colette, I wish you were here,
then I could pour my heart out to you--I miss you
miss you miss you ...

  The steel nib, set into a bone handle, began
blotching. Carefully she dried it and cleaned the
tip, marvelling that it was so easy, the nib again as
good as new. Up to a few years ago the quill
pen was commonplace and she would have had to find the
special quill knife and cut a new point,
splitting it to last but a page or two, whereas
these Mitchell pens, mass-produced in
Birmingham, would last for days and came in many
sizes to please your fancy and your writing.
  Behind her, Struan stirred but did not awaken.
Asleep he has a tidy face, she thought.
Neat and strong ...
  The door opened and Ah Soh barged in.
"Missee, tiffin, you wan' here or downstai',
heya?"
  Struan had awoken at once. "Your
mistress will eat here," he said brusquely in
Cantonese, "I'll dine
downstairs, in our main dining room, and tell the
cook the food had better be exceptional."
  "Yes, tai-pan." Ah Soh hurried off.
  "What did you tell her, Malcolm?"
  "Just that you'd lunch here--I'll be downstairs.
I've invited Dmitri, Jamie and
Norbert." He looked at her silhouetted
against the light. "You look splendid."
  "Thank you. Can I join you? I'd prefer
that."
  "Sorry, we've business to discuss."
  With a great effort he heaved himself upright and she
gave him his two walking sticks. Before he took
them he put his arms around her and she allowed her
body to sigh against him, hiding her anger that she would
be cooped up again--nowhere to go, nothing to do,
except to write some more or read some more and
to wait. Boring boring boring.

  Lun Two cut the first of the large deep-dish
apple pies into quarters, slid them on to fine
pewter plates, poured thick cream generously and
served the four men.
  "God Almighty, where the devil did you get
it?" Norbert Greyforth asked and Dmitri said
over him with equal awe, "I'll be
goddamned."
  "The cream?" McFay belched. "Pardon.
Compliments of the tai-pan."
  Dmitri spooned a mouthful. "Last time I
had cream was in Hong Kong, six months ago,
goddam this's good. This a new Noble House
exclusive?"
  Malcolm smiled. "Our last clipper, a
few days ago, sneaked in three cows. We
unloaded them at night andwiththe help of the army
quartermaster we've had them hidden amongst the
horses--didn't want them hijacked or the
Jappo Customs asking questions. Day and night
guard now." He could not contain his pleasure at the
effect of the cream after a lavish amount of beef,
roast potatoes and fresh vegetables, local
pheasant pie, French and English cheeses--with
beer, Ch`ateau Haut-Brion '46, a fine
Chablis and port. "We're going to start a herd
if they acclimatize here, and a dairy farm--as a
subsidiary of our Hong Kong dairy farm--it
was Jamie's idea originally, and of course the
produce will be available to anyone."
  "At the usual "noble"
prices?" Norbert said sarcastically, plainly
irritated he had had no forewarning of this new
Struan endeavor.
  "At a profit--but a reasonable one,"
Struan said. He had ordered the cows to be rushed
from Hong Kong the moment he arrived here. "More,
Dmitri?"
  "Thanks, great pie, Malc!"
  "How's the word from home?" Jamie asked,
to break the tension between Struan and Norbert
Greyforth.
  "Lousy. Terrible. Both sides are mixing it
and with rifles and long-range artillery--shit, the
killings's the worst ever, afraid the New
World's crazy."
  "The whole world's crazy, old friend,"
Norbert said. "But war's good business, that's a
fact, for the lucky ones," then added, just to rile
Struan, "Brock's have all the Hawaiian
sugar you'll need, at reasonable prices."
  "It'd be a change for anything to be
reasonable," Dmitri said lightly. He knew
all about the huge losses Struan's were going
to sustain because of Tyler and Morgan Brock's
coup, but shrugged to himself. I'm not in their war,
I've my own to worry about. Dear God in
Heaven, how will it end? "War's never good for the people.
Goddam, the cost's going to be huge--you hear that
Lincoln's just got his goddam income tax through
Congress to pay for the war?"
  All the other spoons hesitated. "What's
the rate?"
  "Three cents on the dollar," he said
disgustedly and they all laughed.
  "You're sure?"
  "I just heard today by a special off the
Calif Belle."
  "Three percent? You're bloody lucky,
Dmitri," Jamie said, his plate almost
empty. "I expected fifteen."
  "You crazy? There'd've been a revolution."
  "You're already in one. Anyway, three percent
is the same as us, but yours is only for three
years, that's ... wait a minute," Jamie
said, raising his voice, "that's what Lincoln
promised, swore it was only for three years according
to the last Frisco Chronicle, if Congress
passed it. Three years."
  "True, but you know goddam politicians,
Jamie, once they get a tax through
Congress, or Parliament, they'll never take it
off. Goddam Congress, shysters, all of them.
Three percent's only the beginning."
  "You're right there," Norbert began, equally
sourly, then to Lun, "Yes, I'll have another
slice, and a good dollop of cream. You're right
about bloody taxes! Bloody Pitt, he's the
bugger who first invented income tax and he
promised the same and reneged like Lincoln will.
Politicians are liars all over but Robert
Peel should have been horsewhipped."
  "Robert Peel, the same guy who started a
police force, the Peelers?" Dmitri asked,
and took another spoon of cream.
  "Yes, that's him. The Peelers were a good
idea--though it weren't his idea alone, and we could
use some here, no doubt about that, but income tax?
Monstrous!"
  Malcolm said, "Peel was a good Prime
Minister. He--"
  Norbert deliberately overrode him. "We
only had that damned tax for two short periods
during the Napoleon Wars, fair enough, but then
it was repealed forever in '15, directly after
Waterloo, forever, by God, but didn't piss
arsed Peel bring it back in '41 at seven
pence in the pound, three percent like Jamie said?
And only for three years. Didn't he
renege, and all the other buggers who followed
him? It'll go on forever and twenty guineas to a
bent farthing Lincoln'll renege too. You're
stuck, Dmitri old lad. We are too, because
of Peel. Stupid bastard," he added
deliberately to irritate Struan even though
privately he agreed with his assessment of
Peel overall.
  Struan's good humor was evaporating fast.
"Brandy, Lim, then close door!" Lim
poured generous snifters and left with the other four
liveried servants.
  Norbert belched. "Cream was good, young
Malcolm. Now, to what do we owe the pleasure
of such a feast?"
  The mood at the big table changed. Deepened.
  "What concerns all traders. Sir
William and us being excluded from the Sh@ogun and
Bakufu meeting."
  "I agree the bugger should be axed. Never heard
anything like it in my life!"
  "Yes," Struan said. "At the very
least we should have had a representative there."
  "Agreed," Dmitri said grimly, most of his
mind on home. One brother already dead. Food
riots nearby. "Our guy's nice enough but he's
Yankee. I suggested he appoint me
Deputy but he shat on that idea. What you have in
mind, Malc?"
  "A joint deputation to make sure it won't
happen again, an immediate complaint to the Governor
an--"
  "Stanshope's a berk," Norbert said and
smiled thinly. "But he will do what your Mama
wants."
  "He's not our puppet, if that's what you
imply," Struan said, his eyes as cold as his
voice.
  Dmitri said, "Puppet or not, will he fire
Wee Willie?"
  "No," Struan said. "That has to come from
London. My idea is if William won't
agree that we're to be part of any negotiations in
the future, then we advise Stanshope to make
it policy--he can certainly do that, after all it's
we who pay taxes, it's we who negotiate
with the Chinese, why not here? Jointly we could
accomplish that. Norbert?"
  "That bugger will agree to anything for a simple
life and it won't do a bit of good." His face
tightened. "William's not our whole problem.
It's the Admiral. We need a new
Admiral. That's more important than shoving
William aside. It's him who won't
bombard the bastards like he should. It's him, not
William--any fool can see that." Norbert
finished his brandy and refilled his glass as he
continued, pretending not to notice how his barb had
rocked Struan and irritated McFay. "Again
my compliments on the cream, but the brandy's not up
to scratch. May I send you a barrel of our
Napoleon?"
  With an effort Struan kept his temper. "Why
not? Perhaps it's better. Is your solution to our
problem better?"
  "My solution's well known," Norbert said
harshly. "Demand they hand over Canterbury's
murderers and the indemnity and if no action, three
days later flatten Yedo. How many times do I
have to say it? But the idiots we've got here
won't take normal reprisals which's the
only action natives understand, any
enemy for that matter. And until the Navy act
proper, every bloody one of us here is at risk,
by God!"
  The silence grew. McFay kept his thoughts
off his face, concerned that Struan let himself be at
loggerheads with this much older and more experienced man,
and saddened that Norbert's reply had not been part
of Struan's opening salvo, and disgusted that he had
been kept unaware of the real reason for the meeting
so had not had an opportunity to give some
advice beforehand. "Be that as it may, Norbert,
you agree that you, Dmitri and the tai-pan,
representing the majority, should see Wee
Willie as soon as he returns?"
  "It's all right to see him, but it will mean
nothing." Norbert drank more brandy feeling
better for the confrontation. "I know what Mr.
Brock, a real tai-pan, and Sir Morgan
would say: Tyler Brock would say, with a lot of
blunt Anglo-Saxon, that the Admiral's the
bleeder in the woodpile, William's an
arrogant little bastard who won't change, that
he'll see Stanshope personally who's an
equal fool, and by the first post he'll write
to our friendly Members of Parliament to raise
holy hell." While he spoke, he lit a
cheroot and said through the smoke, his voice sneering,
"And he'll add, even though our friends are more
powerful than yours and will do more than yours, meanwhile
it's a bagful of fart because that'll take five or
six months so he'd say, "get thy arse out of
thy godrotting chair, thee's responsible,
by God, thee's to solve thy problem or I'll be
coming to the Japans and break heads.""
  Struan felt the wave of anger, and wash of
latent fear, that always occurred hearing Tyler
Brock's name, or when he read about him in the
papers or saw him on the streets of Hong
Kong or at the races. "Then what's the
answer?"
  "I don't have one. If I had I would already
have done it, by God." Norbert belched rudely.
"Like your secret Jappo and his mining concessions
you'll never get."
  Struan and McFay gaped at him.
  Two weeks ago Vargas had excitedly
whispered that he had been approached by one of their
silk suppliers, acting as an intermediary for a
Lord Ota, who wanted to meet the tai-pan
secretly Histo discuss granting
Struan's an exclusive gold-mining concession
in his domain that included most of the Kwanto, the
area covering most of the plains and mountains around
Yedo--the concession in return for trade:
armaments."
  "Perfect," Struan had said. "If this
is bona fide it could be a major breakthrough for
us! Eh Jamie?"'
  "If it's real, absolutely!"
  "Here, look, here's their authority."
Vargas showed them the sheet of fine quality rice
paper covered with columns of Chinese-style characters
and sealed elaborately. "This seal is Lord
Ota's, and this the seal of one of the roju, Lord
Yoshi. There are two conditions: that the meeting is
to take place in Kanagawa, and that everything is
kept secret from the Bakufu."
  "Why? And why Kanagawa? Why not here?"'
  "They just said that is where they have to meet, though
they did say they would come by night to the Kanagawa
Legation. The meeting could take place there."
  "It could be a trap, Tai-pan," Jamie
said. "Don't forget Legation Lun was murdered
there, and those assassins ..."
  Malcolm's excitement shriveled, being
reminded. But he put that away. "There are
soldiers there to protect us."
  Vargas said, "They guaranteed their
officials would be unarmed, stressing only the need
for secrecy, senhor."
  "It's too risky for you, Tai-pan,"
Jamie said. "I'll go with Vargas who can
interpret."
  "Sorry, Senhor McFay," Vargas
said, "but they want to talk to the tai-pan
personally. It seems there's no need for an
interpreter--they would supply one who could speak
English."
  "It's too dangerous, Tai-pan."
  "Yes, but too good an opportunity
to miss, Jamie, nothing like this has ever been
offered to any one of us. If we can make such a
deal, in secret all the better, we'll have
made a giant step forward. What are the terms,
Vargas?"'
  "They did not say, Tai-pan."
  "Never mind. Accept their invitation and we'll
meet as soon as possible. One condition: I also
bring Mr. McFay. Jamie, we'll go
by boat, arrange a palanquin for me
at Kanagawa."
  The meeting had been quick and untoward direct.
Two samurai. One, calling himself
Watanabe, spoke a mixture of English and
American slang, his accent American: "Lord
Ota wants two prospectors. Experts.
They kin go anywheres in his lands--wiv guides.
No arms. He guarantees safe conduct,
gives 'em good dry lodgings, food, wiv all
the sak`e they kin drink and women to spare.
One-year contract. You's to keep half the
gold they finds, you's to supply free all
mining gear and overseers for to train his men if they
makes a strike. You's to handle sales. If
successful, he renews second year and third,
and more--if Noble House plays fair.
Agreed?"'
  "They're to prospect only for gold?"'
  "Of course gold. Lord Ota says he
has one small mine, maybe more nearby, eh?
You's to handle sales. Men must be good, must've
been to Californi or Australi fields.
Agreed?"'
  "Agreed. It will take time to find the men."
  "How long?"'
  "Two weeks if there are any in the
Settlement--six months if we have to bring them from
Australia or America."
  "Sooner the better. Next: how many
rifles you's for sale in here right now?"'
  "Five."
  "Lord Ota buys 'em, and all the Choshu
rifles you's a agreed, when they arrives.
Same price."
  "Those are already promised. We can supply
others."
  "Lord Ota wants them Choshu rifles--he
wants 'em. He pays same price. All
Choshu guns, unnerstand? And all others you kin
get. You sell to him only in Nippon, him
only, unnerstand? Same wiv cannon and ships
--all you kin get. He pays in gold. More you
finds, more is yourn."
  Neither Malcolm Struan or McFay could
shift the man's position in any way. At
length Struan had agreed and they had fixed
another meeting in a month when Struan's would
present a simple contract specifying their
guarantees and also dossiers on the two men.
After the samurai had left they had
congratulated each other and, "Jamie, you'll
find them in Drunk Town. For God's sake
hurry, and be careful, before Norbert finds out."
  "Leave everything to me."
  In days McFay had found two qualified
men, an American and a Cornish tin miner both
of whom had worked the gold fields near
Sutter's Mill in California and the Anderson's
Creek discoveries in Australia. Tomorrow the
miners were to finalize their equipment needs and
arrange the details of their contracts and now
Struan and McFay listened appalled
to Norbert saying, "I've done that deal, young
Malcolm, it's done, you can forget it--and those
mining scallywags too, they're contracted
to Brock and Sons for five years."
  "You've what?" Struan gasped.
  Norbert laughed. "Early bird gets the
wriggles, old son. I bettered your deal and
I've already shipped them off to Yedo to samurai
Watanabe. Where'd that bastard learn American
English? Did he tell you? Never mind.
Fifty-fifty on any gold we find is a
good deal." His laugh became even more scornful.
"As to William, I'll see him soon as
he's back, no skin off my nose. Dmitri,
you're welcome, I'll make the arrangements."
He looked at Struan, his upper lip curling.
"As you won't be here I'll take Jamie
along."
  "What?"
  Norbert belched again. "Didn't I hear your
mother ordered you back to Hong Kong on the next
boat?"
  Jamie flushed. "Now look here, Nor--"
  "Keep out of this, Jamie," Struan snarled.
"Norbert, I'd advise you to choose your words
more carefully."
  "Is that so, my fine young feller? Didn't
I hear correct that she wants you back,
ordered you back right smartly, that your Captain was
under orders to do just that?"
  "That's none of your dammed business! I
advise you ..."
  "Everything that goes on in Yokohama's my
bloody business!" Norbert slammed back at
him. "And we don't take advice from anyone in
Struan's least of all a young puppy not yet
dry behind the ears!"
  McFay jumped to his feet and
Struan jerked up his glass of brandy and threw the
contents in Norbert's face.
  "Christ Almighty--"
  "Retract that, Norbert," Struan shouted,
Dmitri and Jamie McFay stupefied by the
suddenness of the escalation, "take it back or I
demand satisfaction, by God!"
  "Pistols at dawn?" Norbert jeered, the
action even better than he had hoped.
Abruptly he yanked half the table cloth
away to dab his face, sending the glasses
clattering. "Pardon for the mess, but you two are
witness I said nothing but the truth, by Christ!"
  "Do you apologize--yes or no?"
  Norbert put both hands on the table, glaring
down at Malcolm Struan who glared back,
white with rage. "You were ordered back, you are
twenty so still a minor before the law and that's hardly
dry behind the ears. It's the truth and here's
another: I could blow your head off or cut it off
with one hand tied, you can't even stand straight so how
you going to fight, eh?" he said, his voice jeering
and heavy with scorn. "You're a cripple, young
Malcolm, and that's the God's truth! Another
truth, your ma runs Struan's, has for years,
and she's running it into the ground--ask Jamie or
anyone honest enough to tell you! You may call yourself
tai-pan but you're not, and you're not Dirk
Struan, you're not the tai-pan and never will be!
Tyler Brock's the tai-pan and, by God,
we'll be Noble House before Christmas too.
Duel? You're mad but if that's what you want,
any time." He stalked out. The door slammed.
  "I'd, I'd like you both to be my seconds,"
Malcolm said, trembling with rage.
  Dmitri got up shakily. "Malc, you're
crazy. Duelling's against the law but okay.
Thanks for lunch." He left.
  Struan tried to catch his breath, his heart
hurting. He looked up at McFay who was
staring at him as though he were a stranger. "Yes
it's mad, Jamie, but then Norbert's the best
of Brock and Sons, he's swamped you and--"
  "I'm sorry th--"
  "So am I. But more truth is I told no
one about the miners, Vargas knew nothing about them,
so it leaked through you. You're the best we've got in
the company but Norbert will bury us here. A
bullet in the bastard's head is the best way
to deal with him--or any of the
God-cursed Brocks."
  After a pause McFay said, "Sorry I
failed you, yes I am, very much, but ... but
sorry, I want no part of any duel, or your
vendetta. It's insane."
  Struan's pallor increased. "Let's talk
about you. Either you keep your holy oath to support
me, by God, or you're really finished. You've
three days."

  Earlier this morning Settry Pallidar and a
troop of mounted dragoons led the procession
across the bridge that spanned the first moat of Yedo
Castle.
  They clattered between ranks of impassive,
uniformed samurai, shoulder to shoulder--thousands of
others had lined the route--over the drawbridge,
under the portcullis and through the massive
iron-sheathed gates. Ahead were their guides,
massed samurai carrying ten-foot-high banners
bearing the ensignia of the roju, three entwined
cherry blossoms.
  Behind the dragoons were half a hundred
Highlanders preceded by their twenty-man band and
giant bandleader, pipes skirrling, then the party
of Ministers and their staff, all mounted, Ministers
in court dress--cocked hats, ceremonial
swords, cloaks or frock coats against the
stiff breeze--except the Russian who wore
Cossack uniform and cape and rode the best
horse in Japan, a brown stallion that had a
personal covey of twenty stablemen to cherish and
guard him with their lives. Phillip Tyrer and
Johann were in attendance on Sir William,
Andr`e Poncin on Henri Seratard. A
company of Redcoats brought up the rear.
  Two small horse-drawn cannon with their
camions and gun crews remained the other side
of the bridge. This had been the subject of days of
wrangling, Sir William insisting that
accompanying ceremonial cannon were an
accustomed courtesy to royals, the Bakufu that
any gai-jin arms were against the law and an insult
to their revered Sh@ogun. The compromise, after a
week of impatient dickering--by Sir William
--was that the cannon would stay outside the
bridge, that royal salutes would not be fired
until the unanimous roju gave the promised
formal permission. "No ammunition to be landed,
so sorry ..."
  This major hitch was resolved with the help of the
French Admiral. During one of the interminable
sessions he brought the flagship closer to shore and
fired broadside after none too accurate
broadside of shells and cannon balls that
passed just beyond the Settlement to land harmlessly in the
pa.i beyond, but petrifying every Japanese within
hearing.
  "If we can't land ammunition," Sir
William explained sweetly, "then we will just
have to make salutes from the sea like this--we did
ask him to use blanks but somehow I suppose
he misunderstood, language you know--and so sorry
if his range falls short and hits your city, it
will be your fault. I will have to explain this in
detail to your Emperor Komei as the
cannonade, and carrying our rifles for full
royal honors, is only a token of respect
to honor your Sh@ogun and, when we see him, your
Emperor Komei, which visit to Ky@oto I
have postponed three times to accommodate you, I will
certainly reschedule the very moment my more powerful
fleet returns from decimating most of the China
coast inhabited by foul pirates who had the
effrontery to pirate a small British
vessel!"
  Bakufu opposition crumbled. So all
rifles were armed and all soldiers warned that though
there might be a fight, under no circumstances and
on pain of extreme punishment were any
Japanese to be provoked. "What about
H.m.s. Pearl, Sir William?"' the
General had asked at the last briefing.
  "She can deliver me and my party to Yedo, then
return here, in case our hosts mount a
surprise attack against the Settlement while
we're away--she can cover an evacuation."
  "Good God, sir, if you think there's a chance
of that, why put yourself at risk?"' the General had
said worriedly. "The other Ministers, well
they'd be no loss but you, sir, if anything
happens to you it would be an international incident.
After all, sir, you represent the Empire! You
should not risk your person."
  "Part of the job, my dear General."
  Sir William smiled to himself remembering how
he kept his voice flat, meaning it as a
pleasantry, but the General had nodded wisely,
believing it to be the truth. Poor bugger's a
berk but then that goes with his job, no
doubt that, he thought cheerfully then dismissed everything
to concentrate on the castle and the coming meeting that was the
culmination of months of negotiating, that would, in
effect, give legality to the Treaty and the opening
of the Treaty ports. It was those few French
shells that worked the miracle, he thought grimly.
Damn Ketterer, but thank God his operation in
China went well, according to dispatches, and that he'll
be back soon. If he can bombard the coast of
China why not here--damn him!
  And damn this castle.
  From afar it had not looked very imposing but the
closer they got to it the more immense it became, with
eight rings of barrack-like structures as its outer
defenses. Then the castle itself, elegant and
beautifully proportioned, he thought, its moat
almost two hundred yards across, the towering outer
walls thirty or forty feet thick and made of
huge granite blocks. Even our
sixty-pounders wouldn't dent those, he told himself
awed. And inside God only knows how many
fortifications surrounding the central keep. And the
only way in through one of the gates, or over the
walls, a frontal attack, and I wouldn't like
to have to order that. Starve it out? God only knows
how many storage places it would have--or how many
troops could be billeted here. Thousands.
  Beyond the gate the roadway angled into a narrow
staging area dominated by bowmen massed in
defensive slots or on the parapets thirty
feet above. The gate was open and led to another
confined courtyard that let out through another fortified
gate into another, clearly to be repeated in a
maze of passage ways that eventually would lead
to the central keep but would always leave a hostile
force at the mercy of the defenders above.
  "We dismount here, Sir William,"
Pallidar said, riding up and saluting. He was
Captain of the escort. With him were samurai
officers on foot and they were pointing at a vast
door that was being heaved open.
  "Good. You're clear on what you have to do?"
  "Oh yes. But I haven't a hope in hell
of covering you or fighting our way out of here, even
against bows and arrows."
  "I don't plan to have to fight anyone,
Captain." Sir William smiled. He
turned in his saddle and gave the signal to dismount.
"This's quite a castle, eh?"
  "Better than anything I've ever
read or heard about," Pallidar said uneasily.
"Beats anything the crusaders had. It makes the
great castle of the Knights of St. John in
Malta seem tiny. Lovely to defend, I'd
hate to have to attack it."
  "My thought too. Phillip!" Sir
William called out, "ask someone where you pee
around here."
  Tyrer hurried over to one of the samurai
officers, bowed politely, and whispered to him. The
man grunted and waved at a casual screen.
"There are buckets over there, sir, and I think
he said there's a bucket in the corner of most
rooms in case one is caught short."
  "Good. Always best to do it before a meeting--even
so, a strong bladder is a most important
boon to a diplomat." After Sir William,
mightily, and the other Ministers had relieved
themselves, he led them through the door: Seratard,
Count Zergeyev, von Heimrich, van de
Tromp, Adamson and a newcomer by the last
mail ship, Burgermeister Fritz Erlicher of the
Confederation of Helvetia--Switzerland--a
bearded giant from their capital Bern who spoke
French, English, German, Dutch and many
German dialects. Phillip Tyrer and
Johann followed closely, Andr`e Poncin
alongside Seratard.
  The audience room was forty yards square with a
massive, high-beamed ceiling, very clean, very
drafty, and stone walls with arrow slits for
windows. Impassive samurai lined the walls.
Two rows of half a dozen chairs facing each
other at the far end. Many doors. Only
servants present to greet them. An
elaborately garbed though low-rank Bakufu
official motioned them to chairs without bowing as
servants brought small trays, saying in
Dutch: "Please be seated for tea."
  Sir William saw that Johann was deep in
conversation with his Swiss Minister so he said
irritably, "Phillip, ask that fellow where the
Council of Elders, the roju, are."
  Hiding his nervousness and conscious that all eyes
were on him and wanting to relieve himself again,
Phillip Tyrer walked over to the official and
waited for him to bow. The man did not, just stared at
him, so he said sharply, "Where are your
manners? Bow! I am a Lord in my country and
I represent these High Lords!"
  The man flushed and bowed low and mumbled his
apologies and Tyrer was exceedingly pleased that
he had had the foresight to ask Nakama for some
key phrases. He interrupted the man even more
imperiously, "Where are your masters, the
roju?"
  "Ah so sorry, please excuse me,
Lord," the man stammered. "They ask that you
wait here to, er, to take refreshment."
  Tyrer missed words but he caught the gist.
"And after refreshments?"
  "It will be my honor to conduct you to the meeting
place," the man said, his eyes cautiously
lowered.
  Again, to Tyrer's enormous relief, he
understood. As he told Sir William what
had been said he could feel the cold sweat on his
back and knew he had been lucky so far.
  Sir William snorted and leaned towards the
others. "Damned if we should wait, eh,
gentlemen? They're overdue--it was agreed we'd
go straight to the meeting--damned if I want
to wait, nor drink their apology for tea.
Good," he said and added to general approval,
"Phillip, tell the fellow we came to see the
roju. That's what we want to do now. Now."
  "How, er, how strong do you, er, want me
to be, sir?"
  "For God's sake, Phillip, if I
wanted you to be long-winded and diplomatic I
would have been long-winded and diplomatic. An
interpreter's job is to translate what is said
exactly, not to give his interpretation of what is
said."
  "The Great Lord says: he want see
roju now. Now!"
  The official was shocked at the impolite
bluntness, an unheard-of affront, and was in a
complete quandary. His instructions had been clear:
The gai-jin will be kept waiting a suitable
"face losing" period, about half a candle,
when we will send word and you may escort them into our
presence. He said rapidly, "Of course I
will take you the instant you have had refreshment and
everything is ready for your perfect reception but oh
so sorry this is just not possible for a little while as
their August Persons are not yet in their
correct attire so it is not yet possible
to comply with your Master's unseemly request,
Interpreter-san."
  "Please to say again, not fast," Tyrer said
nervously, swamped. Another flood of
Japanese. "Sir William I think he's
saying we have to wait."
  "Eh? Why?"
  "My Master say, why wait?"
  More Japanese which Tyrer lost, so the man
turned to Dutch, and Erlicher stepped into the
conversation, further irritating Sir William
and the others. At length Erlicher said, "It
seems, Sir William, that the roju are not,
how you say, ah yes, they are not quite ready, but when
they are we'll be taken to the audience room."
  "Please tell this, this fellow bluntly
to take us there right smartly, that we are on time, that
high-level meetings are always on time because both
sides have other important affairs of State
to deal with as I've explained fifty times! And
tell him to hurry up!"
  Erlicher beamed and said it plainly and however much
the official twisted and turned and eventually
begged, he bowed and, as slowly as possible, led
them through a door, down a corridor--first sending
a messenger ahead to warn to the Council of the
gai-jin's astounding impertinence.
  Another corridor and then, ahead, samurai
opened huge doors, the official went onto his
knees and bowed his head to the floor. Four men in
elaborate silk robes, swords in their
belts sat on chairs at the far end of the
audience room on a slightly raised platform.
The central chair was empty. In front of them,
on a lower level--which all Ministers noted
instantly--were six chairs for each of the
Ministers and between the two knelt the official
interpreter. A hundred or so samurai
officers knelt in a half circle facing the
door and as Sir William came in, all
samurai in the room bowed. The four roju did
not.
  Sir William and the others bowed back
politely, then approached the dais and took their
seats: "Under no circumstances do Ministers of
civilized nations get down on their knees and bow
their heads to the floor," Sir William had
said, "whatever your customs, whether you do it or no
and that's the end of it!"
  Phillip Tyrer, now an expert on bowing
because of Nakama, noticed that each time an Elder
bowed it was as superior to inferior.
Never mind, he thought, awed and excited, we're
in the inner sanctum. When does the Sh@ogun
arrive to take the empty chair? A boy? I
wonder what he'll look like and what--
  An Elder began to speak. With a sudden start,
Tyrer recognized him as the youngish official from
their previous meeting at their Legation, and also the
nervous, swarthy man sitting beside him who had said
nothing then but had watched everything with his narrow
eyes.
  Why had two Elders come to meet with us without
announcing themselves as such? he asked himself. Wait
a minute, didn't the young Official introduce
himself as Tomo Watanabe, yes, certainly he
did, "junior official, second class."
Obviously a phony name. But why? And why the
disguise?
  Unsettled, Tyrer left that to be answered
later and gave his attention to what the man was
saying, understanding almost none of it, as he had been
forewarned by Nakama would happen, who had told
him that Court-oriented words would probably be
used, most of which, as with most ordinary Japanese
words and phrases, had different, often conflicting
meanings.
  His concentration wandered. The third Elder was
rotund with a pudgy face and feminine hands, and the
last truly elderly, graying and thin-faced with a
bad scar on his left cheek. All were barely
over five and a half feet, their winglike
overmantles and wide-legged trousers and
high-domed, lacquered hats tied under their chins
and, above all their immobile dignity, making them
imposing.
  Now the Japanese interpreter spoke in
Dutch: "The roju, the Council of Elders
of the Sh@ogunate welcomes the foreign
representatives and wishes them to present their
documents as has been agreed."
  Sir William sighed, mesmerized by the
empty chair. "All right, Johann, let's
begin. Say to them, shouldn't we wait until the
Sh@ogun honors us with his presence?"
  This into Dutch into Japanese, much discussion,
then again the young Elder, Yoshi, made a
pronouncement, slowly and meticulously
translated into Dutch, into English.
"Basically, without the usual palaver, Sir
William, the spokesman says the Sh@ogun
wasn't expected in this meeting, this is
with the roju only. The Sh@ogun was to be later."
  "That was not as was agreed and I inform them again that
Ministerial credentials are only presented to the
Head of State, in this case the Sh@ogun, so we
can't proceed."
  Back and forth and then, to the Ministers'
displeasure: "The Elder says the Sh@ogun had
to leave for Ky@oto urgently and regrets he will
not have the pleasure of meeting you, etc., but you can
give the roju your credentials as they have his
authority to accept them."
  Back and forth, Sir William's annoyance
reddening into visible anger, more discussion on both
sides and more time consumed, then a scroll, heavy
with characters and sealed importantly and handled as though
it were the Holy Grail, was presented by a
kneeling official to Sir William.
"Phillip, can you read this?"
  "I, no, sorry sir."
  "No need to worry." Sir William sighed
and turned to the others. "This is most improper."
  "Yes," von Heimrich said coldly.
  "Unacceptable," Count Alexi Zergeyev
agreed.
  "A dangerous precedent," Adamson said.
  "It's certainly most unusual," Seratard
said in French, "and they did promise the
Sh@ogun. We could, for just this meeting, agree
to their request, eh, my friends?" He was careful
to hide his own annoyance and kept his voice
smooth and gentle as Andr`e Poncin, at his
elbow, had suggested in a cautious whisper the
moment they had entered the room, adding: "Be
careful, Henri, the roju spokesman is the
same Bakufu official I ... we made the
offer to after the other meeting, to inspect a warship,
remember? Mon Dieu, I thought he was
important, but never one of the Elders! If we
could get him on the side of France, it would be an
marvelous coup ..."
  Count Zergeyev was saying, "Agreeing will
create a deplorable precedent."
  "It will only be for this meeting. Yes?"
  "It doesn't matter, it's wind over a
cow's arse," the Swiss, Erlicher, said.
"Let's get on with it."
  They argued. Tyrer listened but kept his
attention on the Elders without being apparent,
fascinated by them, wanting to take advantage of
this rare opportunity to learn the
maximum about them in the minimum time. His father had
impressed on him from an early age: "In
any meeting, always watch your opponent's hands and
feet, they are the giveaways, eyes too and
faces, yes, but those are usually easily
controlled. Concentrate! Observe, but
cautiously or the clues to tell you what he or
she is really thinking will be obscured. Remember,
my son, everyone exaggerates, everyone lies in
some degree."
  The hands and feet of the swarthy, shifty-eyed
Elder twitched constantly, little nervous
movements, those of the young Elder hardly at all.
From time to time, as in the other meeting, he saw the
man he had dubbed "Shifty Eyes" whisper
to the young Elder, the spokesman--only to him.
Why? Tyrer asked himself. And why does Shifty
Eyes take no part in any of their discussions,
seemingly dismissed by them, keeping his eyes
constantly on the Ministers and not the interpreters.
  Abruptly Sir William motioned at the
empty chair: "If the Sh@ogun was not expected
at this meeting, and there are five Elders in the
roju, why is there an empty chair?"
  Back and forth, forth and back and then: "He
says the President of their Council, Lord
Anjo, has just been taken ill and cannot be here, but
that does not matter, they have his authority
to proceed. Please proceed."
  Von Heimrich, said in perfect French as a
put-down to Seratard, "Doesn't this
invalidate the meeting, didn't they keep harping
on the "unanimous" nature of this Council?
Five men. This could be another deceitful ploy
to be used in future to negate the whole
proceedings." Again an argument began.
  Only Sir William was silent. He was
keeping his fury, and anxiety, off his face.
Clearly we've been duped again. What to do?
Then heard himself say in a firm voice: "Very
well, we will accept this authority as bona fide
from your Sh@ogun, for this meeting only. We will
inform our governments that prior agreement was not
adhered to and we will proceed to Ky@oto as soon
as possible to present credentials properly to your
Sh@ogun--and Emperor Komei--with a more than
suitable escort."
  As Johann began to translate into Dutch,
Count Zergeyev murmured, "Bravo--that's the
only way to deal with the
matyeryebitz!" Von Heimrich and van de
Tromp, the Dutchman, quietly agreed, to the
objections of Seratard, Adamson the
American and Erlicher.
  The Japanese interpreter gaped and said
loudly he was sure that he had misunderstood.
Johann told him there was no misunderstanding.
During this lengthy back and forth, Sir William
closed his ears to them, watching the faces of the
roju intently as they listened to the interpreter.
In varying degrees all of them became
unsettled. Good, he thought.
  "With the usual palaver, Sir William, but
with a heavy load of polite apologies this time,
he says it won't be possible to see the
Sh@ogun in Ky@oto, the weather is very inclement
at this time of the year, but they will make sure the
moment he's back, etc., etc."
  Sir William smiled mirthlessly. "Say
to them: Inclement or not, we will visit the
Emperor in the very near future, stress that
Johann. On that basis only we will
proceed."
  The roju received that in stony silence.
  In turn, Sir William first, then the
others, got up and bowed, spoke his name and rank
and the country he represented, and offered his
credentials. These were accepted with dignity. Each
time the roju bowed back, respectfully.
  "Now," Sir William said, his chin jutting.
"To proceed with the second business of the meeting:
Her Majesty's Government reaffirms that on
Friday the 12th September, this Year of Our
Lord, 1862, an English gentleman was foully
murdered in daylight by samurai of the Satsuma
contingent under the command of their king Sanjiro. Two
others were wounded. Her Majesty's Government
demands the murderers be handed over or dealt with
publicly according to Japanese law, that a reparation
of one hundred thousand pounds sterling in gold be paid
forthwith, an apology published and a public
guarantee promulgated that this will not happen again.
Next: the second and final payment of five
thousand pounds sterling in gold as reparation for the
murders of Sergeant Gunn and Corporal
Roper in our Legation last year, weeks
overdue, be paid in gold in three days or the
amount is doubled every day thereafter ..."
  Sir William allowed time for Johann
to translate word for word but allowing no
discussion until he had finished the list,
Adamson had demanded reparations for the murder of the
American official, and last, the Russian
Minister.
  Count Zergeyev, his multitude of medals and
decorations clinking on his gold-braided uniform
said, "A Russian officer and one soldier off
our man-of-war, Gudenev, were hacked to death in
Yokohama on 16th of February, last
year," then added to the consternation of the others, "For
reparations, Tsar Alexander II of all the
Russias, demands the Kurile Islands."
  During the translations, Sir William
leaned over and whispered pleasantly in
Russian: "A nice jest, Count Alexi,
forof course Her Majesty's Government could never
agree to such an intrusion into our sphere of
influence."
  "Perhaps, perhaps not. War is coming in Europe
again. Soon we'll have to see who are our friends, and
who enemies."
  Sir William chuckled. "That's always a
problem for certain countries. The United
Kingdom has no permanent enemies, only
permanent interests."
  "True, dear friend, but you forgot to add "no
permanent friends." Also now, with Vladivostok,
we're a Pacific power."
  "Power from sea to sea? The dream of the Tsars,
eh?"
  "Why not? Better us than some," Count
Alexi said pointedly, then shrugged. "The
Kuriles? If not them some other islands--merely
to protect Vladivostok."
  "We must discuss your "curious" Pacific
presence under more perfect conditions. My
Government is most interested."
  Seratard, not understanding Russian and furious that
he had not been party to this exchange, said coldly
in French, "I trust, Sir William, you are
well aware of French interests."
  "As always, Monsieur, the interests of
gallant allies are forefront in the mind of
Her Majesty's Foreign Office."
  "Sir William," Johann said wearily,
"the Elder says ... he's only repeating their
previous position that they've no jurisdiction
over Satsuma, don't know who the murderers
are, and think any reparation should be claimed from
Satsuma itself, through correct
channels of course."
  "What correct channels?"
  Back and forth: "He says through them, that they'll
pass on your request to Satsuma again."
  "It's not a request, by God. We will try
one final time, stress that Johann, a different
tack," Sir William said. "Say, Do they
punish murderers, and tell the interpreter I
require a yes or no. Only."
  Back and forth: "He says, Sir
William, that under some circum--"
  "Murder for Christ's sake. Yes or no!
Phillip, say it in Japanese!"
  Tyrer's stomach twisted. He had been
watching the swarthy Elder whispering again but
bravely he jumped to his feet. "Honored
Lords, please excuse my poor Japanese but
my Master ask, please if when murder, you
kill murder man, yes or no please."
  Silence. The Elders looked at Yoshi who
stared at Tyrer, hands playing with his fan. The
man alongside whispered to him and he nodded.
"The penalty for murder is death."
  "He says yes, sir. For murder, the
penalty is death," Tyrer said, having learned
those key words from Nakama who had also explained
the Japanese penal code and its severity.
  "Tell him thank you."
  "My Master say thank you, Lord."
  "Now ask him, Is it correct to demand a
reparation for such a crime, Yes or no?"
  "Lord, please excuse me but is ... is
... I ..." Tyrer stopped, his mind a sudden
blank, "sorry Sir William I don't
know the word for "reparations.""
  At once Andr`e Poncin leapt in with, "The
word's bakkin, Sir William, and little known,
may I try please?"
  "Go ahead."
  "Honored Lords," Poncin said with a deep
bow, and Tyrer blessed him for the rescue and saving his
face. "Please my Master ask if
correct, humbly ask for justice and head
payment for family, for murder, a fine against
Satsuma?"
  "Against Satsuma yes," Yoshi said with a
fleeting smile.
  Andr`e sighed with relief. "He says yes,
Sir William but the reparation should be demanded
specifically from Satsuma." Before
Sir William could ask another question, Poncin
in his most perfect, rehearsed Japanese--and
to Tyrer's astonishment--began to offer the
face-saving formula he had devised:
"Honored Lord, on behalf of my Master,
humbly suggest roju perhap consdir, ah
please excuse, perhaps consider roju lend
Satsuma first payment, one fifth. This you offer
now, give time get rest Satsuma, collect
rest from Satsuma. Please?"
  This time they all saw the young Elder's interest.
At once he began a whispered conversation with the
others, Andr`e saw Tyrer frowning at him so
subtly shook his head, silently asking him not
to interfere. In a moment Yoshi said, "Perhaps it
would be possible to offer a twentieth, paid in a
hundred days against Satsuma's obvious
debt."
  "Honorable Lords ..."
  "What the devil's he saying, Phillip,
and the Elder?"
  "Just a second, Sir William," Andr`e
cut in pleasantly, wanting to crush him.
"Honored Lords, my Master would recommend
a tenth, in sixty days. So sorry, please
excuse bad pronouncing but humbly, very humble
beg yes." Greatly relieved Poncin saw
their discussion begin and gambled again. "Sorry,
Sir William, but as Phillip will confirm,
I suggested they consider advancing payment on
behalf of Satsuma who they say, rightfully, should
pay any reparations."
  "The devil you did? They are?" Sir
William stared at him, tiredness dropping away
from him and all of them. "Well done--if they'd do
that then I could compromise, eh? You agree?"
For the sake of courtesy he turned to the others for
their opinion. Behind him, Tyrer whistled
tonelessly, having understood most of what Poncin
had said in Japanese, the way he was
manipulating the Elder and the Minister, and the
slight, though important difference of the English
translation. Clever of Andr`e. But what is he
up to, is this his idea or is it Seratard's?
Again Shifty Eyes began murmuring
confidentially to the young Elder whose attention went to the
Ministers. It's almost as though ...
  All at once it was as if cataracts had
dropped from his eyes and he had become
clear-sighted again. Even more than that,
now he was seeing the Elders with straight eyes and
not with the oblique and clouded gaze of a self-styled
civilized man, seeing them as people, equally
civilized, equally simple or complex but as people,
and not as outlandish, mysterious or weird
"Jappos" that Nakama, Fujiko, even
Andr`e, in their various ways correctly
resented.
  God Almighty, Shifty Eyes understands
English, he wanted to shout ecstatically. That's
the only answer, and another's that he's a roju
spy and no more an Elder than I am which is why
the others pay no attention to him in their discussions.
What else? He must be Watanabe's spy because
he's the only one whispered to--must find out their
real names and to ask Nakama about them.
Watanabe is the most powerful of this lot, acting
President. The absent President? Got
to find out his real name too. What else? Where
did Andr`e ...
  He concentrated as Yoshi addressed the
interpreter. His voice had sharpened. Instantly
the interpreter became more alert and his Dutch
twenty times briefer. Johann translated,
trying to contain his astonishment, "The roju
agrees in this instance it is correct to ask for a
reparation, from Satsuma, that yes a hundred
thousand seems reasonable for a nobleman though they
can't say it will be considered so by the Lord of
Satsuma. As a gesture of friendship to the
British, and to outside nations, the roju will
advance a tenth part in seventy days on
Satsuma's behalf--while formal British
requests are forwarded to the Satsuma. Concerning the
request of the Russian Minister, as with his own
Homeland, Japanese soil is Japanese
soil and is ... I suppose the word would be
inviolate, or not to be bartered."
  Without being obvious Sir William put a
hand on Count Alexi's to stop the outburst,
saying softly in Russian, "Let it rest,
Alexi," then loudly to Johann, ready
to negotiate the number of days down and the amount
up, "Excellent. Johann, please tell them
th--" He stopped as Tyrer whispered quickly,
"Excuse me, sir, suggest you accept at
once but you really should know their names."
  It was almost as though Tyrer had not spoken for
Sir William continued with hardly a pause and
no change of expression: "Johann,
please tell them their suggestion is acceptable
to Her Majesty's Government in the same spirit of
friendliness. Concerning the Minister from the Court of
St. Petersburg, I am sure he will consult
his government who will, undoubtedly, agree that a
monetary settlement would satisfy." Without
allowing Count Alexi any time to reply he
rushed on: "Regarding our other pressing problem,
the Shimonoseki Straits: all foreign
Governments protest shore batteries firing on
their ships when using those Straits peacefully."
Sir William repeated the dates and the names of
ships, already the matter of much heated
correspondence.
  "They say they will pass on the complaint, Sir
William, with the usual, they've no control over
Choshu."
  "Johann, say: In the friendly spirit of this
meeting, may I suggest it is difficult, if
not impossible, for Foreign Governments to deal with the
Bakufu that apparently does not have authority
over its various kingdoms or States. Therefore
what should we do? Deal directly with the Sh@ogun
who signed our Treaties--or Emperor
Komei?"
  "The legal government of Nippon is the
Sh@ogunate, the supreme ruler of the
Sh@ogunate is the Sh@ogun who rules on
behalf of the Son of Heaven, the roju are the
supreme advisors to the Sh@ogunate whose
officials are the Bakufu. In all cases
Foreign Governments must deal with the
Sh@ogunate."
  "In that case, how can we ensure safe
passage for all shipping using the
Shimonoseki?"
  More draining discussion and always variations of the same
response that was an answer but not an answer
however much Sir William probed. Bladders
agitated the general impatience and fatigue.
Three hours had passed since they began. Then
a vagrant thought became a full-blown
solution. Sir William smiled to himself. "Very
well: say, presuming there are no further
attacks and our serious remonstrations are
delivered to the Choshu daimyo forthwith, we will, in the
spirit of this new friendliness, accept their position for a
future meeting in one hundred days."
  An hour of added maneuvering. "The roju
agree to a second meeting in a
hundred and fifty-six days, here in Yedo and
wish to declare this meeting over."
  "Good," Sir William said, satisfied,
stifling a yawn, "could we please have their names
now, verbally, and then in correct characters on the
paper that we will exchange within three days to confirm
our formal agreements."
  Back and forth, minor details changed, then
finally: "Sir William, he says you'll have the
paper in a week, the interpreter will give you their
names and the meeting is ended." As each Elder was
introduced the man nodded briefly and
impassively: "Lord Adachi of Mito, Lord
Zukumura of Gai, Lord Yoshi of
Hisamatsu ..." Tyrer was delighted to see that
Shifty Eyes, last in the line, was sweating, his
hands and feet squirming and his bow had nowhere near
the imperiousness of the others: "Lord Kii of
Zukoshi."
  "Please give them our thanks. As
previously agreed, I will now order royal
salutes."
  "Lord Yoshi says, unfortunately one of their
members is missing. As previously agreed,
unanimous approval of the roju is necessary
to grant the firing of any cannon."
  Abruptly Sir William's bonhomie
fell away. All Ministers were shocked. "What
about our agreements?" he asked sharply. "Do they
require unanimous approval too?"
  Back and forth amid much tension and muttered
caution amongst the Ministers. Then Johann said
awkwardly, "Lord Yoshi says that this gathering
has the Sh@ogun's authority and the President's
to accept credentials, to listen and recommend.
They will unanimously recommend the settlement.
As previously agreed, approval for firing
cannon needs unanimous approval of all
Elders so regretfully this body cannot allow it."
  The silence became unhealthy as Sir
William and all of them realized the trap they
had fallen into. No option this time, he thought, his
stomach twisting. "Captain Pallidar!"
  "Yessir?" Pallidar came from the back,
heart suddenly grinding, knowing along with everyone
else facing the roju that Sir William had
no option now but to give the order to fire the
salutes, whatever the cost, or the same excuse
would surely be used to negate their settlement.
  As he saluted perfectly,
"Yessir?" Seratard broke in with his smoothest
and most diplomatic voice: "Sir
William, I feel sure that the agreement is
bona fide, will be implemented, and you can accept
it. I recommend you do this, we all do, eh
gentlemen?" he said to general relief at the
face-saver, "and also recommend under the
circumstances we forgo the salutes. You agree,
Sir William, on our behalf?"
  Sir William hesitated grimly.
  To further astonishment, Seratard added grandly,
"Andr`e, tell them on behalf of France I will
go surety for the first installment."
  Before Sir William could say anything,
Andr`e was bowing: "My Master say, Honored
Lords, he happy roju give paper in a
week, agree lend Satsuma first money in
seventy day. Say also France, as Nippon
friend, honored give personal bond to British
Minister against first payment. Also he honored
greet all or one of roju any time
personally, in ship or any place. Humbly
thank you, Honored Lords."
  With narrowed eyes, Yoshi said, "Thank your
Master. The meeting is ended."
  A samurai officer called out, "Kerei!"
--salute--and every samurai bowed, holding that
position as the roju got to their feet and bowed
back with measured politeness. Sir William
and the others had little option but to follow suit as
Yoshi led the way to an unseen door beside the
dais and were quickly gone. At once the samurai
straightened and resumed their staring, suspicious
hostility.
  "Very satisfactory, Sir William,"
Seratard said expansively in French, taking his
arm, wanting to distract him again. "Well done."
  "Your Masters in the Elys@ee will be very peed
off with you when we ask for ten thousand in gold,"
Sir William said, a little piqued but not
entirely--except for the firing of the cannon he
had made a giant step forward. "Peed or not it
was a grand gesture, Henri, however expensive."
  Seratard laughed. "Twenty guineas says
they'll pay."
  "Done! Will you dine with us at the Legation?"
They began walking out, careless of the arrogant,
bellicose stares.
  "Thank you no. As we've concluded our
business I think I'll start back for
Yokohama now instead of tomorrow, there's time enough and the
sea's calm. Why wait for Pearl, join us
aboard my flagship, we can dine en route,
eh?"
  "Thanks but I'll wait till tomorrow. I
want to make sure all our lads are back
safely on our transports."
  Behind them, unnoticed in the throng, Tyrer had
waited for Andr`e who had knelt to adjust a shoe
buckle, who then, not realizing Tyrer was watching,
began a whispered conversation with the Japanese
interpreter. The man hesitated then nodded and
bowed. "Domo."
  Andr`e turned, saw Phillip scrutinizing
him. For a split second he was nonplussed,
then smiled as he joined him. "Well,
Phillip, that went very well, didn't it? I
thought you were excellent, and we certainly made the
points."
  "I wasn't and you saved the day. And my
face, for which many thanks." Tyrer frowned,
unsettled, following the procession. "Even so,
though you brilliantly solved the impasse, what
you said in English and what was said in Japanese was
different, wasn't it?"
  "Not that different, mon ami, not enough
to matter."
  "I don't think Sir William would
agree."
  "Perhaps perhaps not. Perhaps you were mistaken."
Andr`e forced a laugh. "It's never wise
to agitate a Minister, eh? A closed mouth
catches no nasties."
  "Most times, yes. What did you say to that
interpreter?"
  "I thanked him. Mon Dieu, my
bladder's killing me--how's yours?"
  "Same," Tyrer agreed, sure that Andr`e was
lying about the interpreter. But then why shouldn't he?
he was thinking with his newfound point of view.
Andr`e is enemy, if not enemy, the opposition,
and every nuance was to benefit and ingratiate
Seratard, France and Andr`e. Fair enough.
What would he ask for secretly? To pass on a
message, yes, but what? What secret
message? What would I ask for secretly?
"You asked for a private meeting with Lord Yoshi,
eh?" he said, gambling. "For you and Monsieur
Seratard."
  Andr`e Poncin's expression did
not change but Tyrer noticed his right hand on his
ceremonial sword became white-knuckled.
"Phillip," he said thinly, "I've been a
good friend to you since you arrived, helping you begin
Japanese, introducing you around, eh? I
haven't interfered with your private samurai--
Nakama, eh, though I've heard, secretly,
he's got other names. Haven't ..."
  "What other names?" Tyrer asked, suddenly
nervous and not knowing why. "What do you know about him?"
  Andr`e went on as though Tyrer had not spoken:
"Haven't tried to question him or you about him though I
did warn you about Japanese, all of them, time enough
for you to tell me about him if you want to, as a
friend. Remember we're on the same side,
Phillip, we're servants not masters, we're
friends, we're in Japan where gai-jin really have
to help each other--like I did introducing you
to Raiko who led to Fujiko, eh? Nice girl
Fujiko. Best to have a little Gallic realism,
Phillip, best keep private information
private, best beware of your Nakama and
remember what I've said a dozen times: In
Japan there are only Japanese solutions."

  Near sunset the same day, Yoshi hurried
along a somber, drafty stone corridor in the
castle keep. Now he wore his characteristic
kimono with two swords, a cowled riding cloak
over them. Every twenty paces were flickering oil
torches, set into iron brackets beside bowman
emplacements that also served as windows. Outside
the air was cool. Ahead was a circular
staircase. It led to his private stables below.
He ran down the steps.
  "Halt! Who ... ah, so sorry, Lord!"
The sentry bowed.
  Yoshi nodded and went on. Throughout the castle
soldiers, stablemen, servants were preparing for bed
or for night duties, following the universal,
worldwide custom of bedding down at nightfall.
Only the well-to-do had light by night, to see,
to read or to play.
  "Halt! Ah, so sorry Lord." This sentry
bowed, and the next, and the next.
  In the stable courtyard a personal guard of
twenty men, was assembled at the heads of their
ponies. Amongst them was Misamoto, the
fisherman, the make-believe samurai and
Elder. Now he was poorly clad as
a common foot soldier, unarmed, and frightened.
Two small enclosed palanquins, especially
light and designed for rapid transport were there.
Each was slotted on to two shafts that fitted
into harness for two saddle ponies ahead and behind.
All hooves were muffled and all this part of a plan
he had devised with Hosaki days ago.
  The spy window of one palanquin slid
aside. He saw Koiko peer out. She
smiled, nodding a greeting. The window closed.
His hand tightened on his sword. Ready, he
slid her door open enough to ensure she was who he
thought she was and that she was alone. When he was very young
his father had beaten the first law of survival into him,
word by word: "If you are caught unawares,
betrayed unawares, killed unawares, you failed
in your duty to me and to yourself. The fault will be yours
alone because you failed to check personally and to plan
against any eventuality. There is no excuse for
failure except karma--and gods do not
exist!"
  A quick reassuring smile to her. He slid the
door home and checked that the other palanquin was
unoccupied and available for his use if he needed
it. Satisfied, he gave the signal to mount.
This was done in almost complete silence which again pleased
him--he had ordered all armor and harness to be
muffled. A last silent check but he could sense
no danger. The new rifle was in a saddle
holster, the ammunition pouch full, the other four
guns slung over the shoulders of his most trusted
marksmen. Noiselessly he swung into his
saddle. Another signal. His advance guard and
banner man carrying his personal standard led off.
He followed, then the two palanquins and the rest
fell into place as rear guard.
  Their progress was quick and almost soundless. Up the
passageway into the next fortification, directly
away from the main gate and main thoroughfares. At
each checkpoint they were motioned through without
challenge. Instead of turning into the maze of the
castle proper, they made for a large building on
the north side set against one of the major
fortifications. Outside it was heavily guarded.
The moment Yoshi was recognized, tall doors
swung open to let them ride through. Inside was a
large, enclosed and packed-earth practice riding
ring with a high vaulted ceiling and a second tier for
viewing. A few torches, here and there. The
doors closed behind them.
  Yoshi cantered to the head and led briskly through
the far archway, past stables and harness rooms.
All were empty. This area was cobbled, the air
heavy with the smell of dung and urine and sweat.
Beyond, the hard-packed earth began again and another
arch let out to an inner, smaller ring. Across it was
an archway, dimly lit. Yoshi heeled his
surefooted pony faster, then reined in suddenly.
  The surrounding upper tier was packed with silent
bowmen. None had arrows in their bows but all those in
the ring knew they were dead men--if the order was
given.
  "Ah, Yoshi-sama." Nori Anjo's harsh
voice came out of the semi-darkness above and Yoshi
had difficulty for a moment picking him out. Then
he saw him. Armorless, he was sitting at the
back of the tier beside the staircase. "At this
afternoon's meeting you didn't tell us you were going
to leave the castle with armed men like ... like what? Like
ninja?"
  A rustle of anger spread through Yoshi's men
but he laughed and this broke the tension, below and above.
"Not ninja, Anjo-sama, though certainly as
quietly as possible. It's a good idea to test
defenses, without warning. I'm Guardian of the
castle, as well as Guardian of the Sh@ogun.
And you? To what do I owe this pleasure?"
  "You are just testing our defenses?"
  "I am killing three doves with one arrow
yes." The humor had left Yoshi's voice and
all were chilled, wondering why three and what did
he mean. "And you? Why so many bowmen? For an
ambush perhaps?"
  The coarse laugh pealed among the rafters,
edging everyone further. Hands tightened on weapons
though no one made an overt move. "Ambush?
Oh no, not an ambush--an honor guard. The
moment I heard you planned a patrol with muffled
hooves ... these men are just to honor you, and to show
you not all of us are sleeping, that the castle is in
good hands and a Guardian not needed." He barked a
command. At once all bowmen hurried down the
stairs and formed two lines the length of the ring,
Yoshi and his men between them. They bowed formally.
Yoshi and his men bowed back, formally. But nothing
had changed, the trap was still ready to be sprung.
"You need guns to test defenses?"
  "Our Council advised all daimyos to arm
with modern weapons," Yoshi said, his voice
outwardly calm, inwardly furious that
his plan had been betrayed and that he had not foreseen
an ambush. "These are the first of my new
rifles. I wish to accustom my men to carry
them."
  "Wise, yes, very wise. I see you carry
one too. Lord Yoshi has to carry a gun
himself?"
  Seething at the jeer, Yoshi glanced down at
the rifle in its holster, hating all guns and
blessing the wisdom of his namesake in outlawing their
manufacture or importation the day he became
Sh@ogun. Hasn't that more than anything ensured
our peace for two and a half centuries, he thought
grimly. Guns are vile, cowardly weapons,
worthy only of stinking gai-jin, weapons that can
kill at a thousand paces so you may never see
who you kill or who has killed you, weapons that
any simpleton, low person, maniac, filthy
robber, man or woman can use against anyone,
even the highest lord with impunity, or most
perfectly schooled swordsman. Yes, and now
even I have to carry a gun--the gai-jin have forced us
into it.
  With Anjo's sneering jibe ringing in his ears,
he jerked the rifle out of the holster, pushed the
safety off as Misamoto had shown him, pointed
it, pulled the trigger, immediately pumped shells
into the breech, blasting five bullets deafeningly
into the rafters, the rifle almost twisting out of his
hands with unexpected force. Everyone scattered,
even his own men, a few unseated by frightened rearing
ponies, Anjo and his guards dived for the floor
anticipating more firing, lethal this time, every man in
the room unnerved by the rapidity of firing.
  In utter silence all waited breathlessly and
then, because there was no follow-up and they realized
Yoshi was just demonstrating the rifle, the two
ranks of archers hastily but warily reformed around
his own men who were sorting themselves into order. Anjo
and his guards scrambled to their feet. "What was the
meaning of that?" he shouted.
  As nonchalantly as he could, his own heart
pounding, Yoshi continued to gentle his pony and
quietly pushed the safety catch on and laid the
gun across his lap, concealing his delight with the
success of his action and that he was as impressed as
anyone with the rifle's power--he had fired
muzzle loaders before and some old-fashioned
duelling pistols at targets, but never a
breech-loader with cartridges. "I
wanted to show you the value of one of these. In
certain circumstances they're better than a
sword, particularly for daimyos." He was
glad to hear that his voice sounded calm. "For
instance, when you were ambushed a few weeks ago, you
could have used one, neh?"
  Shakily Anjo was controlling his wrath, quite
sure that now he was in great danger, his life under
immediate threat, and equally certain if he ordered
Toranaga's arrest as he had planned
bullets would pepper him--in the name of all
gods where and how did that dog learn to shoot and why
was I not informed he had become an expert?
  And being reminded of the shishi incident was an added
public insult for it was well known he had not
been brave but had had to scramble to safety, never
duelling once with his assailants and then, after the
wounded were captured, had ordered them to be killed
in a dishonorable fashion. "Under some
circumstances, Yoshi-sama, some, but I doubt
if your gun or any others have value tonight. I
doubt that. May I ask your purpose tonight? Is
it to visit our outside defenses and return?
Or is one of your "doves" a departure for
elsewhere?"
  Both knew Yoshi was not answerable for his
movements in or out of the castle precincts. "That
depends on what I see outside," he said
curtly. "I may decide to return to my own
domain for a day or so, perhaps not--of course I would
keep you closely informed."
  "The Council would miss your presence, if
only for a few days. There's much to be done, if
you're absent, we will have to make the decisions
ourselves."
  "As we decided this afternoon, there's nothing major
to be decided, fortunately without five Elders
nothing of major importance can be settled."
  "There is the matter of the gai-jin agreement."
  "That was also decided this afternoon."
  The meeting of the Council after the gai-jin had
departed, for once, had been happy and filled with
laughter at the enemy's loss of face, that once
again the gai-jin had been outsmarted, Anjo,
Toyama, and Adachi congratulating him for his
expert handling of the confrontation and understanding of
gai-jin, Zukumura saying little except
muttering feeblemindedly from time to time.
  Anjo had chortled, "Agreeing to advance a
pittance to get rid of them and their ships
from Yedo while we bring Satsuma to heel was very
clever, Yoshi-sama. V. At the same time
we've indefinitely postponed their threat to go
to Ky@oto, and they agree that Satsuma is
completely to blame."
  Toyama said, "Then we declare war on
Satsuma? Good!"
  "No, not war, there are other ways to curb that
dog." Anjo was very confident with his newfound knowledge.
"You were right about the gai-jin, Yoshi-sama. It
was vastly interesting to see how enmity between them all
is so close to their revolting surfaces." He
and Toyama had witnessed the meeting from behind the
dais, the wall there deliberately made
see-through from the inner side. "Revolting. We
could even smell them through the screen. Disgusting.
I've ordered that audience room washed out and the
seats they sat in destroyed."
  "Excellent," Adachi said. "My skin
crawled all the time I was there. Yoshi-sama,
may I ask about that monkey Misamoto, did
he really tell you what the gai-jin said, everything?
I couldn't hear a word?"'
  "Not all of it," he had told them, "enough
to give me some advance clues but only when they were
speaking English. Misamoto said much of the time they
were speaking another language, he thought French.
This proves another point: we must have trusted
interpreters. I propose we start a
language school for our brightest sons at
once."
  "School? What school?"' Zukumura
mumbled. No one paid any attention.
  "I disagree." Toyama's dewlaps
shook. "The closer our sons get to gai-jin,
the more infected they'll be."
  "No," Anjo said, "we'll personally
select the students--we must have trusted barbarian
speakers. We will vote: The Bakufu will be
ordered to form a language school at once.
Agreed? Good, next, the gai-jin letter: we will
continue Yoshi-sama's tactic, the day before it's
due we tell them it will arrive "as soon as
possible." Agreed?"'
  "Sorry no," he had said, "we must do the
exact opposite. We must deliver the letter on
time, exactly, and give them the second
blackmail payment on time too."
  They stared at him and Zukumura mumbled,
"Letter?"'
  Yoshi said patiently, "The gai-jin must be
kept off balance. They will be expecting us
to delay, so we don't, and that will make them
believe the one hundred and fifty-six days is
also firm which of course it isn't. That we
certainly delay and delay and hope to send them
all mad." They had laughed with him, even
Zukumura who did not understand why they were laughing
had laughed anyway--and even more when Yoshi told
them how many times he had almost guffawed during the
meeting, seeing how their impatience was ruining their
already illusory bargaining position. ""Without the
killer dog the master's as weak as a puppy against
a man with a stick.""
  "What? Man with a stick?"' Zukumura
asked, his dead codfish eyes peering stupidly,
"What dog?"'
  Much of Yoshi's good humor had left him,
reminded that now he had to endure this feebleminded
man forever. Nonetheless, he explained that without
muscle to back up their complaints, and the will to use
it, the enemy were helpless.
  "Muscle? Don't understand, Yoshi-sama.
What muscle?"'
  "Force," Anjo said impatiently,
"Force! Their cannons and their fleets,
Zukumura. Oh never mind!"
  Toyama, the old man, said fiercely,
"While they're without their fleet we should burn
them out--they are unspeakably arrogant, with foul
manners and as for their spokesman ... I'm
glad I didn't have to be present,
Yoshi-sama, I think I would have burst.
Let's burn them out, now."
  "Who? Burn who?"'
  "Keep quiet, Zukumura," Anjo said
wearily, "and just vote when I tell you.
Yoshi-sama, I agree with your reasoning.
We'll send the letter on time and the second part of
their blackmail money when agreed. Everyone in
favor? Good. Next: now that we've dealt with the
gai-jin, and the Sh@ogun and Princess are
safely on the North Road there's not much to do
for the next week or so."
  "Allowing them to go was a misguided decision and
will come back to haunt us," Yoshi had said.
  "In this you are wrong. Please prepare a
plan, your ideas how to bring that dog Sanjiro and
Satsuma to heel. I vote we meet in two
weeks, unless there is an emergency
..."
  Later, going back to his own quarters Yoshi
had not been able to think of any potential
emergency that would require his presence in Yedo--
even the second covert, whispered invitation
to visit the French warship that he neither accepted
nor refused but left open for the weeks ahead was
not urgent. So he had resolved to put into effect
at once the plan he and his wife, Hosaki,
had devised. Now Anjo and his bowmen were barring his
path.
  What to do?
  "Good night, Anjo-sama," he said, making
the decision. "As always, I will keep you
advised." Covering his disquiet and feeling naked
he spurred his pony forward, heading for the far
archway. None of the archers moved, waiting for
orders. His men and the two palanquins followed
him, feeling equally defenseless.
  Anjo watched them go. Enraged. But for those
rifles I would have had him arrested as planned.
On what charge? Treason, plotting against the
Sh@ogun! But Yoshi would never have been brought
to trial, oh no, so sorry, fools would have
killed him as he tried to escape justice.
  A sudden shaft of pain in his bowels made him
grope for a seat. Baka doctors! There must be
a cure, he told himself, then heaped more curses
on Yoshi and the men who had disappeared under the far
archway.
  Yoshi was breathing better now, the fear sweat
no longer chilling him. He trotted deeper
into fortifications, along poorly lit
corridors, passed more stables and harness rooms
until he came to the end wall. The wall was
sheathed in wood. Men dismounted and lit torches from
those in wall brackets.
  With his riding whip he pointed at a knob to one
side. His aide dismounted and pulled it sharply.
A whole section of the wall swung outwards
to reveal a tunnel, tall enough and wide enough for two
men to ride along, side by side. At once he
heeled his pony into motion. When the palanquins
and the last man were through and the door once more closed,
he sighed with relief. Only then did he
holster the rifle.
  But for you, Rifle-san, he thought
affectionately, I might be a dead man, at the
very least a prisoner. Sometimes I can see a
rifle really is better than a
sword. You deserve a name--it was ancient
Shinto custom to give names to special swords
or weapons or even rocks or trees. I shall
call you "Nori" which also can mean "seaweed"
and is a pun on Nori Anjo, to remind me that
you saved me from him and that one of your bullets
belongs to him, in his heart or head.
  "Eeee, Lord," his Captain said, riding
alongside. "Your shooting was a marvelous thing
to behold."
  "Thank you, but you and all the men were ordered to be
silent until I gave you leave to speak. You
are demoted. Go to the rear." The crestfallen
man hurried away. "You," Yoshi said to his
second in command, "you are now Captain." He
turned in his saddle and went forward again, leading.
  The air was stale in the tunnel. This was one of the
many secret escape routes honeycombing the
castle. The castle with its three moats and soaring
donjon had taken just four years to build--five
hundred thousand men had, at Sh@ogun
Toranaga's suggestion and at no cost to him,
proudly worked on it night and day until it was
finished.
  The floor of the tunnel sloped downwards and
curled this way and that, the sides hewn out of rock
in places and roughly bricked in others, the
ceiling propped here and there but in good repair.
Always downwards but without danger. Now water
dripped from the sides and the air became cooler and
Yoshi knew that they were under the moat. He pulled
his cloak closer around him, hating the tunnel and
almost sick with claustrophobia--a legacy from the
time when he and his wife and sons had been close
confined for almost half a year in dungeon-like
rooms by tair@o Ii not so very long ago. Never
again will I be confined, he had sworn, never again.
  In time the floor sloped upwards and they came
to the far end that opened into a house. This was a safe
place that belonged to a loyal Toranaga clan
vassal, who, forewarned, greeted him.
Relieved that there was no further trouble, Yoshi
motioned the advance guard to lead.
  The night was pleasing and they trotted through the city
by little known paths until they were on the outskirts
and at the first barrier of the Tokaid@o. There
hostile guards immediately became docile seeing the
Toranaga standard. Hastily they opened the
barricade and bowed and closed it, all of them
curious but none stupid enough to ask questions.
  Not far beyond the barrier the road forked. A side
road meandered northwards, inland, towards the
mountains that, in a normal three or four days
ride, would bring him to his castle, Dragon's
Tooth. Gladly the advance guard swung that
way, heading for home--to their homes as well as
his, most of them not having seen their families,
fianc`ees or friends for the best part of a year.
Half a league down the road, approaching a
village where there was a fine watering place and a
hot spring, he called out, "Guards!"
beckoning them back.
  The new captain of the escort reined in
alongside and almost said, Sire? but caught himself
in time. He waited.
  Yoshi pointed at an Inn as though a sudden
decision. "We stop there." It was called Seven
Seasons of Happiness. "No need for silence
now."
  The courtyard was neat and tidy and cobbled. At
once the proprietor and maids and menservants
hurried out with lanterns, bowing and anxious
to please, honored with the majesty of their expected
guest. Maids surrounded the palanquin to take
care of Koiko, while the proprietor, a
neat, balding, slim old man who walked with a
limp, conducted Yoshi to the best and most
isolated bungalow. He was a retired
samurai called Inejin who had decided
to shave his knot and become an innkeeper.
Secretly he was still hatomoto--a privileged
samurai--one of Yoshi's many spies that dotted
the surrounds of Yedo and all approaches
to Dragon's Tooth. The new captain,
conscious of his responsibility, and four
samurai accompanied them, Misamoto and his
two guards last.
  Quickly the captain made sure the dwelling was
secure. Then Yoshi settled himself on the
veranda, on a cushion facing the steps, the
captain and the other samurai kneeling on guard
behind him. He noticed the maid offering tea was
fresh-faced and well chosen, the tea tasting
better for it. When he was quite ready he waved the
maids and servants away. "Please bring them
here, Inejin," he ordered.
  In moments Inejin returned. With him were the
two gai-jin prospectors. One tall, the
other stocky, both gaunt, tough-looking, bearded
men wearing grimy, rough clothes and
battered caps. Yoshi studied them curiously,
distastefully, seeing them more as creatures than
men. Both were uneasy. They stopped near the
steps, gaping at him.
  At once the Captain said, "Bow!" and when
they did nothing, just stared at him without understanding, he
snarled at two samurai, "Teach them
manners."
  In seconds they were on their knees, faces in
the dirt, cursing their stupidity at accepting such
a perilous job: "Wot the fuck, Charlie,"
the stocky man, a Cornish miner, had said in
Drunk Town a few days ago after their meeting
Norbert Greyforth, "wot we's got to lose?
Nuffink! We's starving and we's broke, we's
no work, we's can put nuffink more on the slate,
man--even with my cobber Bonzer for Gawd's
sake--there ain't a bar in Yokopoko that'll
give us a beer, a bed or a bite of bread
let alone some crumpet. Not a ship'll give
us a berth. We's stuck and soon the Aussie
Peelers'll land here, or yors from 'Frisco,
then we's both be in chains, me hanging for
bushwhacking a few poxy, claim-jumping miners
and you for rustling and shooting some bloody
bankers."
  "You trust that bastard Greyforth?"'
  "Where's yor honner, me old cock
sparrer! We give him our markers, right? He
done like he promise, a proper toff, right? He
give we's twenty-two quid to pay wot we's
owe to stay out of the brig, another twenty in the
bank for when we's back, all shovels, powder
and goods we's need and a sworn contract in front
of the preacher that we's to gets two parts of every five
we ships to Yoko, right? All like he promise,
right? He's a toff but all toffs is slimy."
  The two men had guffawed, the other saying,
"You're goddam right."
  "Now we's the prospectors, right? It's
we's who finds the pay dirt, right? In Jappo
land, where's we's alone, right? We's kin hide
a poke or two, eh? And sneak it out, right?
All the grub, booze and dinkie-die for a year,
our own bleeding Yoshiwara for not a penny piece,
an' a first shot at Jappo gold? Me I'm
in if you isn't. ..."
  "Let them sit up, do not hurt them.
Misamoto!"
  Misamoto was on his knees at
once. The moment the two men saw him, some of their
concern left them.
  "These are the men you met at the dock
yesterday?"
  "Yes sire."
  "They know you as Watanabe?"
  "Yes, Lord."
  "Good. They know nothing about your past?"
  "No Lord, I did it all as you ordered,
everything an--"
  "You said sailors in Nagasaki taught you
English?"
  "Yes Lord."
  "Good. Now, first tell they will be well treated
and not to be afraid. What are their names?"
  "Listen you two, this's the Boss, this's
Lord Ota," Misamoto said as he had been
told to name Yoshi, his coarse slang American
easily understood by them. "I tol' you bastards
to bow and scrape or you'd hav' it done for you.
He says you're to be well treated and wants
to know yor names."
  "I'm Johnny Cornishman and he's
Charlie Yank an' so far we's nothing to eat
or drink for Christ's sweet sake!"
  As best he could, Misamoto translated the
names.
  "You will tell them nothing about me or what you have
done since I took you out of prison--remember
I have ears everywhere and I will know."
  "I will not fail, Lord." Misamoto bowed
deeply, hiding his hatred, desperate to please
and frightened for his future.
  "Yes." For a moment Yoshi considered him. In
the two-odd months since he had taken
Misamoto into his service the man had changed
radically, outside. Now he was cleanshaven, his
pate also shaved and his hair groomed in samurai
fashion. Enforced cleanliness had improved his
appearance greatly, and even though he was
deliberately kept in the vestments of the lowest
class of samurai, he looked samurai and
wore the two swords now as though they belonged.
The swords were still false, just hilts with no
blades within the scabbards.
  Thus far Yoshi was pleased with his performance and
when he had seen him robed and hatted as an
Elder, he had been astonished, not recognizing
him. A good lesson to remember, he had thought
at the time: how easy it is to appear
to be what you are not!
  "It would be better for you not to fail," he said
then turned his attention to Misamoto's two
guards. "You two are responsible for the safety
of these two men. The Lady Hosaki will supply
further guards and guides but you two are
responsible for the success of the venture."
  "Yes Lord."
  "As to this fake Watanabe," he said, his
voice soft but no man mistook the finality
therein, "he is to be treated as samurai though of the
lowest rank, but if he disobeys correct
orders, or tries to escape, you will tie his hands
and feet and drag him to wherever I am. You are
both responsible."
  "Yes, Lord."
  "I won't fail you, Lord," Misamoto
muttered, grey-faced, some of his terror passing
on to the two miners.
  "Tell these men they are quite safe. And also that you
will be their helper and teacher, there is no need for
any of you to be frightened if you obey. Tell them
I hope for a quick success to their search."
  "The Boss says there's no need to be
scared."
  "Then why's yous pissing in yor pants?"
  "Piss off yorself. I'm ... I'm to be
in charge so mind yor goddam manners."
  "Best watch yors or when we's alone we's
feeding you's yor balls. Where's the piss-arsed
grub and where's the booze an' where's the doxies
we's promised?"
  "You be getting it soon enough, and best be
polite around these ... guys," Misamoto said
cautiously. "They's like a cat with a bee up its
ass. And the Boss says best find the gold right
smartly too."
  "If there's gold we's kin find it,
Wotinabey, old cock. If it ain't there it
ain't there, right Charlie?"
  "Excuse me, Lord, they thank you for your
kindness," Misamoto said, not quite so frightened. He
had suddenly realized that if he was to accompany
them he would be the first to know about a strike. "They
promise to try to find treasure as quick as
possible. They respectfully ask if they could have
some food and drink and when can they begin."
  "Impress it on them it pays to be patient,
pays to be polite and to be diligent. Teach them
correct manners, how to bow and so on.
You are responsible."
  As Misamoto obeyed Yoshi motioned to his
aide who brought out the two short overmantles that
Hosaki had had especially made, like
waistcoats with ties on them. On the front and
back were panels of inked characters on pale silk that
read: This gai-jin is a personal retainer and
prospector, under my protection, who is
allowed, provided he has official guides with
correct papers, to prospect anywhere within my
domain. All are ordered to assist in this work.
Each panel bore his seal. "Tell them they are
to wear it always and it will give them safe passage
--explain what the writing says."
  Again Misamoto obeyed without thought and showed the
two men how to wear them. Cautiously now, they
pretended a patience and humility alien to their
nature and upbringing. "Charlie," the
Cornishman whispered, adjusting the tie strings,
hardly moving his lips to speak like most ex-cons
--he had had four years hard labor in the
Australian outback for claim jumping: "In
for a penny, in for a fuckin' quid."
  The American grinned suddenly, more at ease.
"I hope there's more than a quid's worth, old
buddy ..."
  Yoshi watched them. When he was satisfied he
motioned to Misamoto. "Take them with you and wait
in the courtyard."
  Once they had gone, after bowing correctly
without assistance this time, he sent everyone out of
hearing range, except Inejin. "Sit down,
old friend." He motioned to the steps where the old
man could sit comfortably--his left hip crushed
in a fall from a horse making it impossible for
him to kneel. "Good. Now, what news?"
  "Everything and nothing, Lord." For three
centuries Inejin and his forefathers had served this
branch of the Toranagas. As a hatomoto he
had no fear of speaking the truth but the obligation
to do so: "The land has been worked diligently and
manured properly, crops grow, but farmers say
this year there will be famine even here in the
Kwanto."
  "How bad will the famine be?"
  "This year we will need rice from elsewhere to be
safe, and elsewhere will be far worse."
  Yoshi remembered what Hosaki had already
told him, and was very glad with her foresight and
prudence. And also glad to have a vassal
like Inejin--rare to find a man who could be trusted
implicitly, even rarer to find one who would speak
truthfully, the truth based on real knowledge and not for
reasons of personal aggrandizement. "Next?"
  "All loyal samurai are seething with
impatience at the impasse between Bakufu and the
rebellious Outside Lords of Satsuma,
Choshu and Tosa, their samurai equally
discontented, mostly because of the usual problem:
rates of pay fixed a century ago are causing
ever greater hardship, it being ever more difficult
to pay the interest on ever-increasing debts, and
to buy rice and food at ever-increasing prices."
Inejin was deeply aware of the problem as the
majority of his widespread family, still
samurai class, were suffering badly. "Daily
the shishi gather adherents, if not openly,
certainly undercover. Peasants are correctly
docile, merchants not so, but all, except most
merchants in Yokohama and Nagasaki, would like
the gai-jin expelled."
  "And sonno-joi?"
  After a pause the old man said, "Like many things
on earth, Lord, that battle cry is part right, part
wrong. All Japanese detest gai-jin--
worse than Chinese, worse than Koreans--
all want them gone, all revere the Son of
Heaven and believe His wish to expel them
correct policy. Of your twenty men here tonight,
I believe twenty would support that part of
sonno-joi. As you yourself do, providing it is the
Sh@ogunate who wield the temporal power
to effect His wishes, according to procedures laid
down by Sh@ogun Toranaga."
  "Quite correct," Yoshi agreed, but in his
innermost heart he knew that if he had had the
power he would never have allowed the first Treaty, so
never a need for the Emperor to interfere in
Sh@ogunate matters, and would never have allowed
mean-minded men surrounding the Son of Heaven
to misguide Him.
  Even so, contrary to sonno-joi, if he had
power, now he would invite some of the gai-jin in
while he had time. But only on his terms. And
only for the trade he desired. It is only with
fleets and guns like theirs, he thought, that we can
deny them our land, expel them from our seas, and at
last fulfill our historic destiny to place the
Emperor on the Dragon Throne of China. And
then, with their millions and our bushido,
the whole gai-jin world will obey. "Go on,
Inejin."
  "There's not much more that you do not already know, Lord.
Many fear the boy Sh@ogun will never be a man,
many are disturbed by the less than wise Council,
many are shocked that your prudent advice against his
journey to Ky@oto as a supplicant was
overridden, many regret that you do not control the
roju to force necessary changes: the Bakufu made
corruptless, clever--and to stop the rot."
  "The Sh@ogun is the Sh@ogun," Yoshi said
curtly, "and all must support him and his
Council. He is our liege Lord and must be
supported as such."
  "I completely agree, Sire, I merely
report samurai opinion as best I can. Few
want the Bakufu and Sh@ogunate cast out.
Only a handful of numbskulls believe the
Emperor could rule Nippon without the
Sh@ogunate. Even amongst shishi few really
believe the Sh@ogunate should be ended."
  "So?"
  "The solution is obvious: somehow a strong hand
must take control and rule as Sh@ogun
Toranaga ruled." Inejin eased his leg more
comfortably. "Please excuse me for being long
winded. May I say how honored I am by your
visit."
  "Thank you, Inejin," Yoshi said thoughtfully.
"No news of any daimyos collecting forces
against us?"
  "Not mobilizing, Lord, not in this area, though I
hear Sanjiro has all Satsuma on a war
footing."
  "And Choshu?"
  "Not yet, but Ogama has again reinforced his
garrison troops holding the Gates, and
increased the number of shore batteries on the
Shimonoseki."
  "Ah! His Dutch armorers?"
  Inejin nodded. "Spies tell me they train
his gunners, and make four cannon a month in the
new Choshu arsenal. These are rushed to redoubts.
Soon the Straits will be impregnable."
  That's good and bad, Yoshi thought--good to have that
option, bad that it is in enemy hands. "Ogama
plans to step up attacks on shipping?"
  "I am told for the moment no. But he has
ordered his batteries to destroy all gai-jin
shipping and close the Straits
permanently when he send them a code word."
Inejin bent forward and said softly, ""Crimson
Sky.""
  Yoshi gasped. "The same that Sh@ogun
Toranaga used?"
  "That's what was whispered."
  Yoshi's mind was in a whirl. Does that mean,
like my forebearer, Ogama is going to launch an
equally sudden and all embracing surprise
attack--supreme power again being the prize? "Can
you get proof?"
  "In time. But that is the present code word.
As to Ogama's real plan," Inejin shrugged.
"He has the Gates now. If he could
persuade Sanjiro to pledge allegiance to him
..."
  The silence grew. "You've done very well."
  "Another interesting fact, Sire. Lord
Anjo has a disease of the stomach." Inejin's
eyes lit up even more seeing Yoshi's immediate
interest. "A friend of a friend who I trust tells
me he has secretly consulted a Chinese
doctor. The disease is the decaying disease and cannot
be cured."
  Yoshi grunted, part from pleasure, part from an
ice pick of anxiety that he might contract the
same--who knows how or from where--or have it already in
his innards waiting to fell him. "How long will he
live?"
  "Months, perhaps a year, not more. But you should be
doubly on guard, Sire, because my informant
says that while the body rots with no outward
blemishes, the mind does not, just twists
into dangerously implacable routes."
  Like the stupid decision to permit the Princess
to dominate, Yoshi thought, his head buzzing with what
he had been told. "Next?"
  "Next, Sire, about the shishi who attacked
and assassinated Lord Utani and his paramour.
They were led by the same Choshu shishi who attacked
Lord Anjo--Hiraga."
  "The one whose likeness was sent to all barriers?"
  "Yes Sire, Rezan Hiraga, at least
that's what the captured shishi said the man's name was
before dying. It is probably false. Another of
his aliases is Otani."
  "You have caught him?" Yoshi said hopefully.
  "No, Sire, not yet, and unfortunately we
have lost all trace of him so he must be elsewhere.
Possibly Ky@oto." Inejin
dropped his voice even more. "Rumor has it there
is going to be another shishi attack in
Ky@oto. Many are believed to be collecting
there. Many of them."
  "What sort of attack? An assassination?"
  "No one knows, yet. Possibly another
coup attempt. The shishi leader with a code name,
"the Raven," is said to have issued the summons.
I am trying to find out who he is."
  "Good. One way or another shishi must be
wiped out." Yoshi thought a moment. "Could their
venom be directed against Ogama, or
Sanjiro, the Emperor's real enemies?"
  "Difficult, Sire."
  "Have you discovered who told the shishi about
Utani? About his secret tryst?"
  After a pause Inejin said, "It was the
Lady's maid, Sire, who whispered to the
mama-san who whispered to them."
  Yoshi sighed. "And the Lady?"
  "The Lady appears to be blameless,
Sire."
  Yoshi sighed again, pleased that Koiko was not
involved, but deep inside, he was unconvinced.
"The maid is with us now--I will deal with her.
Make sure the mama-san suspects nothing,
she be dealt with when I return. Have you discovered
the other spy, the one feeding gai-jin with information?"
  "Not for certain, Sire. I'm told the
traitor is, or his alias is Ori, I
don't know his full name but he's a Satsuma
shishi, one of Sanjiro's men, one of the two
Tokaid@o killers."
  "Inept to kill one when four were such easy
targets. Where is the traitor now?"
  "Somewhere in the Yokohama Settlement,
sire. He has become a secret confidant of
both the young English interpreter and the Frenchman you
told me about."
  "Ah, him too." Yoshi thought a moment.
"Silence this Ori at once." Inejin bowed,
accepting the order. "Next?"
  "That ends my report."
  "Thank you. You have done well." Yoshi
finished the tea, deep in thought. Moonlight cast
strange shadows.
  The old man broke the silence. "Your bath
is prepared, Sire, and you must be hungry.
Everything is ready."
  "Thank you, but the night is good so
I will go on at once. There's much to do at
Dragon's Tooth. Captain!"
  Quickly everyone assembled--Koiko and her
maid hastily changed back into travelling
clothes and she reentered her palanquin. With due
deference, Inejin, his household, maids and
servants bowed their guest on his way.
  "What about all the food we prepared?" his
wife, a round-faced, tiny woman, also of
samurai descent, asked hesitantly,
delicacies she had hastily but correctly
bought at vast cost to tempt their liege lord on this
sudden visit--more than three months of their
profit for the single meal.
  "We will eat it." Inejin watched the cortege
trotting away through the sleeping village until
it was gone. "It was good to see him, a great
honor."
  "Yes," she said and dutifully followed him
back inside.
  The night was gentle, enough moonlight to see by.
Beyond the village the dirt road twisted
northwards through the trees, villages every few
miles, all the land around well explored
by Yoshi since childhood. It was quiet. No
one journeyed at this time of night, except
robbers, ronin or elite. They forded a brook,
the land more open here. On the other side he called
a halt, beckoning the captain.
  "Sire?" the Captain asked.
  To their growing excitement, Yoshi twisted in his
saddle and pointed east and south, back towards the
coast. "I am changing my plan," he said as
though it was a sudden decision and not one planned
over many days. "Now we go that way, to the
Tokaid@o, but we bypass the first three
barriers, then cut back onto the Road just after
dawn."
  There was no need to ask where they were heading.
"Forced march, Sire?"
  "Yes. No further talking. Lead off!" A
hundred and twenty leagues, ten or eleven
days, he thought. Then Ky@oto and the Gates.
My Gates.





                                 
                 

              YOKOHAMA

  In the late afternoon of the same day Hiraga
ducked into the lee of a shack on the edge of
Drunk Town where a small, grimy sailor
waited nervously. "Gimme the money, mate,"
the man said. "You got it, eh?"
  "Yes. Gun p'rease?"
  "One day you's a toff, now you's a poxy
nuffink." The man was grizzled-faced and
suspicious, a wicked knife in his belt,
another in a forearm holster. When Hiraga had
first talked to him on the beach, he had been wearing
his Tyrer-arranged clothes. Today he wore a
dirty laborer's woolen smock, coarse
trousers and scuffed boots. "Wot's yor
game?"
  Hiraga shrugged, not understanding him. "Gun,
p'rease."
  "Gun is it? I's the gun right enough." The
shifty little eyes darted around, across the
weed-infested, scrap heap strewn area between
Drunk Town and the Japanese village--
called No Man's Land by the locals--but could
sense no alien watchers. "Where's brass?" he
said sullenly, "The money for crissake, the
Mex!"
  Hiraga reached into the pocket of the smock,
everything feeling uncomfortable and outlandish, the
clothes bought especially for today. Three
Mexican silver dollars glittered in his hand.
"Gun, p'rease."
  Impatiently the sailor reached into his shirt
and showed the Colt. "You gets it when I gets the
money."
  "Bu'rret, p'rease?"
  A filthy rag from the man's trouser pocket
revealed a dozen or so cartridges. "A
bargin's a bargin and me word's me word." The
sailor reached for the money but before he could take it
Hiraga's hand closed.
  "Not sto'ren, yes?"
  "'course not stole, come on for crissake!"
  Hiraga opened his fist. Greedily the coins
were grabbed and examined carefully to ensure they were not
clipped or forged, all the time the crafty eyes
darting this way and that. When he was satisfied he
passed over the Colt and bullets and
got up. "Don't get caught with it, matey,
or you'll swing, 'course it's stolen." He
leered and scuttled away like the rat he
resembled.
  Hiraga hunched down as he went back to the
comparative safety of the Japanese village--
safe only so long as the riffraff and drunks
did not decide to rampage. There were no police
or sentries to protect the villagers. Only
an occasional naval or army patrol passed
along their main street and these men rarely took
their side in any ruckus.
  It had taken Hiraga many days to arrange the
purchase--naturally he could not ask Tyrer's
assistance. No one in the Yoshiwara possessed
one. Raiko had said queasily: "Only
gai-jin have them, Hiraga-san, so sorry.
Dangerous for civilized person to be caught with
one."
  Akimoto said with a grin, "If my cousin
wants one, then get him one, Raiko! You can do
anything, neh? For payment I will take you to bed
without fee ..." He ducked as she threw a
cushion at him, laughing with him.
  Raiko said, fanning herself, "Ah
Hiraga-san, so sorry, I beg you to take this
naughty man away, two of my girls have already
demanded a day off to sooth their yin from the onslaught
of his yang ..."
  When they were alone, Akimoto said seriously,
"Perhaps you should change your mind, forget the gun.
Let me try and persuade Ori to meet us
here."
  Hiraga shook his head, glad for the company of
his good-natured cousin. "Ori has a gun, he
will use it against us the moment he sees us. I have
tried every way to snare him out of Drunk Town and
failed. If I ambush him with a gun, there, it will
seem a gai-jin did it. Any day he will try
to get at that girl again and then I'm finished
here."
  "Perhaps he will tire of waiting. Every man in the
village has been told to watch out for him, and
no one is to sneak him in by sea."
  "Who dare trust a villager?"'
  Akimoto said heavily, "Then when you get a
gun, let me do it." He was much bigger than
Hiraga. Not recognizing him when he arrived,
he too had cut his hair in similar fashion.
  Eventually Hiraga had accosted the
sailor on the beach, pretending to be a visiting
Chinese trader from Hong Kong and had struck a
deal, his only proviso that the gun should not be
stolen. But of course it would be stolen ...
  Akimoto was waiting for him in their dwelling in
a village alley they now rented by the month.
"Eeee, Cousin, please excuse me," he said
laughing, "no need to ask if you got it, but you
look so funny in those clothes, if our shishi
comrades could see you ..."
  Hiraga shrugged. "This way I can pass for
any of the gai-jin coolies, wherever they come from.
All kinds of gai-jin and coolies dress like this
in Drunk Town." He eased himself more
comfortably, sore in the crotch. "I cannot understand
how they can wear such heavy clothes and cramping
trousers and tight coats all the time--and when it's
hot, eeee, they're terrible, and you sweat a
fountain." While he talked he checked the action
of the Colt, testing its weight, aiming it. "It's
heavy."
  "Sak`e?"
  "Thank you, then I think I will rest till
sunset." He loaded the revolver, swigged some
sak`e and lay down, pleased with himself. His eyes
closed. He began to meditate. When at peace
he let himself drift. In moments he slept.
At sunset he awoke. Akimoto was still on
guard. He looked out of the tiny window. "No
storm or rain tonight," he said, then pulled out a
scarf and tied it around his head as he had seen
low-class gai-jin and sailors do.
  Suddenly Akimoto was filled with dread. "And
now?"
  "Now," he said, hiding the gun under his belt,
"now for Ori. If I do not return, you kill
him."
  Most villagers on the streets did not
recognize him, the few who did bowed nervously
as to a gai-jin and not a samurai as they had been
ordered. In his European attire to most
gai-jin eyes, he would be just another Eurasian
or Chinese trader from Hong Kong or
Shanghai or Manila the quality of his clothes
and bearing foretelling his position and wealth: "but
never forget, Nakama-san," Tyrer had warned
him continually, "however rich you appear, smart
clothes won't protect you from harassment or
insults from riffraff if you go alone into Drunk
Town, or anywhere."
  The first time he had gone looking for Ori, the
moment the shoya had told him Ori had disobeyed
him, he had stormed into Drunk Town wearing his
Tyrer clothes. Almost at once he had been
cornered by a rowdy group of drunks who
surrounded him, jeering and cursing him, then started
to attack. Only his skill in karate, still an
unknown art to gai-jin, had saved him and he had
retreated seething, two broken heads and another
man crippled in his wake.
  "Find out exactly where Ori is! At
once," he had told the shoya. "What he's
doing and how he's living!"
  The next evening the shoya drew a rough map:
"The house is here, on this corner facing the
sea, near some wharfs. It is a drinking-sleeping
house for very low persons. Ori-san rents a
room, paying double I was told. Very bad that
place, Hiraga-san, always full of evil
men. You cannot go there without a special plan. It
is important he is sent away?"'
  "Yes. Your village is at risk with him
here."
  "So ka!"
  Two days later the shoya told him that, in the
night, the Ori house had burned down, the
remains of three men had been found in the ruins.
"I was told "the native" was one,
Hiraga-san," the shoya said easily.
  "A pity the whole foul area was not destroyed
too, and every gai-jin in it."
  "Yes."
  So life became calm again. Hiraga continued
to spend time with Tyrer, content to learn and to teach,
unaware how vastly important and informative his
knowledge was to Tyrer, Sir William and Jamie
McFay. For half a day he had gone aboard
the British frigate with Tyrer. The experience
had shaken him and made him more determined than ever
to find out how these people he despised could invent and
make such unbelievable machines and warships, how
such despicable people of such a tiny island, smaller
than Nippon--if again Tyrer was to be believed
--could have acquired the vast wealth necessary to possess
so many ships and armies and factories and, at the
same time, rule all sea-lanes and much of the
gai-jin world.
  That night, he had drunk himself
to insensibility, his mind disoriented, uplifted one
second, in the abyss the next, his
kernel of belief in the absolute invincibility
of bushido and the Land of the Gods badly mauled.
  Most evenings he would spend with Akimoto in the
Yoshiwara, or their village haunt, planning
and sharing his gai-jin knowledge though keeping the extent of his
disquiet hidden, but always strengthening his net around
Tyrer, toying with him: "Ah so sorry,
Taira-san, Fujiko contract take many
weeks, Raiko hard trader, contract
expensive, she have many c'rients, many, so sorry
she busy tonight, perhaps tomorrow ..."
  A little over two weeks ago, to Hiraga's
fury, the shoya had discovered Ori had not died in
the fire: "... and oh so sorry,
Hiraga-san, but I'm told now Ori-san
has become suddenly wealthy, spending money like a
daimyo. Now he has several rooms in another
drinking house."
  "Ori rich? How is that possible?"'
  "So sorry I don't know, Sire."
  "But you do know where his new house is?"'
  "Yes Sire, here, here is the map, so
sorry th--"'
  "Never mind," Hiraga had said
furiously, "tonight burn him out again."
  "So sorry, Hiraga-san, that is no
longer easy." The shoya was outwardly penitent,
inwardly just as furious that his first and immediate solution
to the mad ronin had not achieved the purpose he
had paid for. "It is no longer easy because this
house is isolated and, it seems he has many
bodyguards, gai-jin bodyguards!"
  Icily Hiraga had considered the consequences.
He sent a honeyed letter to Ori by one of the
villagers who sold fish in Drunk Town,
saying how delighted he was to hear Ori was alive
and not dead in the dreadful fire as he had heard,
also that he was prospering and could they meet in the
Yoshiwara that evening as Akimoto also wanted
to discuss shishi matters of great importance.
  Ori had replied by letter at once; "Not in the
Yoshiwara or anywhere, not until our
sonno-joi plan is done, the girl is dead
and the Settlement burned. Before that if you,
Akimoto or any other traitor comes near you
will be shot."
  Akimoto said, "He knows the fire was not an
accident."
  "Of course. Where would he get money?"'
  "Only by stealing it, neh?"'
  Other messages only brought the same
answer. A poison plot had failed. So he
had bought the gun and made a plan. Now it was time
and tonight perfect. The last rays of sunset
guided him across No Man's Land and along the
fetid streets that were pocked with dangerous
potholes. The few men who passed him, hardly
looked at him except to curse him out of the way.

         END OF VOLUME Very
















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume VI of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 1125-1348




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK TWO

                 

    Friday, 17th October: (continued)
  Ori reached haphazardly into the small sack
of coins on the table beside the bed and pulled one out.
It was a clipped Mex, now worth half of its
normal value. Though still five times her agreed
price, he handed it to the naked woman. Her
eyes lit up, she bobbed a curtsey, mumbling
abject thanks again and again, "Yore a proper
gent, ta, luv."
  He watched absently as she wriggled into her
tattered old dress, astonished that he was here,
repelled by everything about this room and bed and house and
place, and the pallid, bony gai-jin body and
slack buttocks he had fantasized would
allay the fire maddening him, but had only made
his need worse, in no way comparing with her.
  The woman paid no attention to him now. Her
job was done except to mumble the customary thanks
and lies about his performance--in his case not lies for
what his organ lacked in size was made up with
strength and vigor--and to get away and keep her
newfound wealth without further trouble. Her dress
hung on her thin, bare shoulders to trail on the
threadbare carpet, partly covering the rough wooden
floorboards. Torn petticoat, no
drawers. Lank brownish hair and heavy rouge.
She looked forty and was nineteen, a street urchin
born in Hong Kong to unknown parents, and sold
into a Wanchai House eight years ago by her
foster mother. "You want me back termorrer?
Termorrow?"
  He shrugged and pointed to the door, his wounded arm
healed and as good as it would ever be, never with the same
strength, or quickness with a sword but good enough against an
average swordsman, and good enough with a gun. His
derringer was on the table and never far from his hand.
  The woman forced a smile and backed away,
mouthing thanks, glad to get away without a beating
or having to endure the foul practices she had
feared. "Don' you worry, Gerty," her
madam had told her, "Chinermen're like any
others, sometimes a bit picky, but this bugger's
rich so just give 'im wot he wants, give it
to 'im quick, he's rich so give it good." There
was little extra she had had to do, other
than to endure his frantic battering with stoicism
and necessary grunts of feigned pleasure.
  "Ta again, luv." She went out, the Mex
secreted in the soiled bodice that hardly covered
her flaccid breasts, another coin, a twentieth
of its value clutched in her hand.
  On the landing outside was Timee, a rough
Eurasian seaman of mixed but predominantly
Chinese blood. He shut the door and grabbed
her. "Shut yor gob, you poxy whore," he
hissed, forcing her hand open to take the coin, then
cursed her in Chinese and guttural English for the
poorness of her earnings: "Ayeeyah, why
didn't you please the Guv?" Then he cuffed her
and she half stumbled, half fell down the
stairs, but when safe, turned and cursed with even
more venom. "I'll tell Ma Fortheringill 'bout
yer, she'll do yer!"
  Timee spat after her, knocked and reopened the
door. "Musume gud, Guv, heya?" he
asked unctuously.
  Now Ori sat at an old table by the window.
He wore a rough shirt and breeches with bare
legs and feet, his short sword-knife in a
belt holster. The money sack was on the table.
He saw the narrowed eyes staring at it.
Carelessly he found another Mex and tossed it.
The heavy-shouldered man caught it expertly,
touched his forelock and smirked, his few remaining
teeth broken and yellowed. "Thankee, Guv.
Grub?" He rubbed his big belly. "Grub,
wakarimasu ka?" Their communication was with
sign language and a little pidgin, and he was chief
bodyguard. Another watched downstairs in the
bar. A third in the alley.
  Ori shook his head. "No," he said, using
one of the words he had picked up, then added,
"Beer-u," and waved him away. Alone at
last he stared out of the window. The glass was
cracked and fly encrusted, a corner missing,
opening on to the drab facade of another
ramshackle, wooden hostel opposite, ten
yards away. The air smelt dank and his skin
felt filthy, and crawled at the thought of that
woman's body in sweating close contact, with no
chance for a civilized Japanese bath afterwards though
he could easily have had one in the village, a
couple of hundred yards away across No
Man's Land.
  But to do that you risk Hiraga and his
spies who will be waiting, he thought, Hiraga and
Akimoto and all villagers who deserve to be
crucified like common criminals for trying
to prevent my grand design. Scum! All of
them. Daring to try to burn me to death, daring
to poison the fish--eeee, karma that the cat stole
it before I could stop the beast and, in moments, died
retching instead of me.
  Since then he had eaten sparingly, and only
rice that he cooked himself in a pot in the grate,
with a little meat or fish stew made for the other
boarders and bar customers that he made Timee
taste in front of him as a further protection.
  The food's foul, this place foul, that woman
foul and I can only wait a few more days before I
go mad. Then his eyes noticed the money bag.
His lips moved from his teeth in a vicious
smile.
  The night of the fire in the other hovel he had
been sleeping on a cot in a tiny, squalid
alcove in the back of the bar that had cost him the
last of his money. Long before others in the hostel
awoke, his danger senses honed in a score of
fires since childhood had warned him, tearing
him out of sleep, to find flames were already licking
the wooden stairs above, and to see another gourd of
oil with a burning rag in its neck being hurled
into the main barroom.
  An hysterical dog bounded down the stairs and
joined two cats frantically seeking escape
and the three animals began charging around the room
crashing into bottles of spirits that, smashing on the
cobbled floor, nourished the blaze. Screams and
uproar began from the crowded floor above.
Half-naked men started cascading down the stairs
in panic, flames licking at them as they fled
into the street.
  The stairs caught. Then a sudden tongue of
flame soared upwards along the tinder dry
walls and banister. The barroom was blinding hot,
the air seared as a heat-generated wind roared the
fire into an implacable killer. The sides of the
front door began to burn furiously, the
flames almost barring it. More men rushed pellmell
down the stairs, screaming, tripping over one
another in panic through the flames to the outside,
some already with parts of their hastily donned clothes
on fire. Only minutes had passed since the
arson began but now the fire was in total command and the
building doomed.
  In his cubbyhole Ori was unafraid, fire
drilled, safely out of the billowing smoke, hugging
the floor, his mouth already covered with a beer-soaked
rag, his emergency escape route automatically
docketed the moment he had gone into the room.
Safety lay always in refusing to panic, and this
time through a small, shuttered window across the
barroom, well away from the burning stairs that
let out onto the back alley.
  He was just about to sprint away when he saw the
corpulent proprietor in nightshirt and
tasseled hat with other terrified men fighting down
the stairs, an iron safety box tight under his
arm. Furiously this man shoved another out of his
path into the flames only to have the same flames
convert him into a screaming torch and tumble him with
two others into the blazing ruins of the stairway as it
collapsed, cutting off any further escape from
above. The box flew out of his helpless arms
to skeeter across the floor. One badly burned
man staggered out of the fire for the doorway.
Flames greedily consumed the proprietor and the
two other men and seemed to reach for the box, equally
greedily.
  Without hesitation Ori rushed through the flames,
grabbed it up and charged for the window, easily
bursting the rotting shutters apart and was out safely
into the fresh air and back alley. At once he
ducked down and ran for the fence opposite, scaled
it and, still keeping low, wormed through the trash and
weeds of No Man's Land towards the abandoned
well.
  Once there, chest heaving, he looked back
warily. Flames from the hostel soared into the sky.
Men milled about, shouting and cursing. Two men
jumped from the upper windows. Others with buckets
of water were dousing adjoining shacks and buildings,
bellowing for help.
  He had not been noticed.
  While the noise covered him, he found a
broken crowbar and prized off the lid of the box,
dismissing the swarming mosquitoes and night
insects. The treasure inside made him throb.
Quickly he stuffed two bags of coins into the
pocket of his breeches, another into his smock
shirt. With great care he buried the dozen or so
other bags and, in a different place, did the
same with the box.
  The next morning he wandered Drunk Town
until he found a more isolated rooming
house that was far from the burned-out wreck. Ten
Mex in the owner's hand, and the weight of the bag that
remained, brought him immediate, unctuous service, a
big room of his choice. The owner, a man with
deep-set, brilliant blue eyes--just like
hers, he had thought, a sudden shaft in his loins
--had pointed at the bag: "You'll be bushwhacked
wiv that lot, young woggeroo."
  Ori had not understood the words. The man's
meaning soon became clear and produced Timee.
Also that if Timee was well paid, and the owner well
paid, Ori would be safe here or on the street, and
when out, his room would be sacrosanct. As an
insurance, knowing the danger of putting his trust in
these men, with more sign language and patience Ori
had made it also clear that these two bags were only
a small part of his wealth that was safely under guard
in the village which he was ready to spend lavishly
for protection and anything else he required.
  "Yor the Guv, you name it and you can 'ave it.
Me name's Bonzer and I'm Australian."
Like almost everyone in Drunk Town, he scratched
constantly at flea and lice bites, his teeth
few and twisted, and he stank. ""Guv?" That
means Ichiban!, Number one.
Wakarimasu ka?"'
  "Hai, domo."
  The door opened, dispelling his thought pattern.
Timee brought him a tankard of beer. "Guv,
I'm getting me grub now." He coughed.
"Grub, food, wakarimasu ka?"
  "Hai." The beer quenched Ori's thirst but
did not settle his mind or compare with beer of the
village. Or at home in Satsuma or in the
Yoshiwara, or at Kanagawa's Inn of the
Midnight Blossoms. Or anywhere.
  I must be going mad, he thought, bewildered. That
gai-jin whore with her toad belly skin and fish
smell was worse than the worst old hag I've
ever had, yet I enjoyed the Clouds and the Rain
twice and wanted more and more.
  What is it about them? Is it their blue eyes
and white skin and fair brown pubics--in those that
whore was not much different from her, in all else
yes. Unconsciously his fingers toyed with the
cross that he wore, half hidden around his neck.
His lips curled in a crooked smile. In the
tunnel he had tricked Hiraga. The piece
of metal he had thrown was the last of his gold
oban. I'm glad I kept her
cross--to remind me constantly. And it has been
more than useful in other ways, making these stupid
gai-jin think I'm Christian. What is it about
their women that sends me mad?
  It's karma, he told himself with finality,
karma that there is no answer, never will be any
answer except ... except to send her
onwards.
  The thought of her neck in his hands, his manhood
deep within, made his flesh tingle and ached him
anew as though the other had not happened. Once more
the room began to swim and crush him so he swung
his feet to the floor, pocketed his derringer, put
on a leather jerkin and went downstairs.
  "Guv?" Timee coughed and got up from a
plate piled with rice and stew to go with him, but he
waved him back and the other man to guard upstairs
and went outside.

  Hiraga saw him at once. He was on the
other side of the busy dirt street, sitting on
a bench outside a dingy bar. In front of him was
an untouched gourd of beer and around were noisy men,
drinking or standing or dead drunk on benches, or
heading homewards for their dormitories or
rooming houses, or favorite bar or gambling
rooms that crowded together here in a slum as bad or
worse than any in London town. The men were a
polyglot of European, Asian and
mixed-race laborers and workers, armed with at least
a knife and dressed similarly to him, coming from their
day's toil in sail-making shops or ship's
chandlers, or mechanics from the machine shops, a
new profession, or from any one of the dozens of
services to do with ships. Along with beggars and
bums were bakers and butchers and brewers and
moneylenders and others who supported this part of
Yokohama or fed off it, separate from the
village and "Nob Town" as they all called
the trader's sector, by mutual consent.
  "In Drunk Town," Tyrer had
explained to him, "there are perhaps a hundred and
fifty souls, most are drifters. They've few
rules. It's every man for himself but woe betide
anyone caught stealing, the immediate mob would beat him
half to death. They've no law except army and
navy patrols searching for deserters, or just
trying to keep the peace between the services, breaking
up fights or riots. Beer and gin parlors--
gin's a rotgut that will kill if you're
not careful--they're open as long as there're
customers, so are the gambling dens. Don't try
any of them or Ma Fortheringill's, she loathes
Japanese because of our cut-rate Yoshiwara--
bless it! At the far end, near the South Gate,
off Hog Lane, is the worst part of Drunk
Town. I've never been there, best stay away from
it too, that's where the most depraved and lost try
to survive. Opium, beggars, scum, male
prostitutes. Abattoir. Cemetery.
Disease. And multitudes of rats ..."
  The little that Hiraga had understood had made him
want, even more, to see everything for himself. Tonight was his
first opportunity. Except for a few absent
curses that would apply to anyone, no one bothered
him as he trailed Ori easily, just enough light in
the darkening sky.
  His prey meandered towards the shore, seemingly
without purpose and without any of the bodyguards he
had been warned against. His excitement notched
higher. The revolver in his pocket felt good
to his touch. His fingers ached to grip it and aim it
and pull the trigger to end the menace to his future
here, then to begin his controlled retreat to safety
through No Man's Land, or along the beach to the
Legation.
  Now they were nearing the small, main square beside
the promenade and shore where bars and eating and
rooming houses fought for custom. This was the far end
of the Settlement, the narrowest part, and jammed between
the sea and encircling fence where the South Gate
was. As at the North Gate, the fence was strong
and high and went into the surf. The only opening was the
barricaded guarded South Gate.
  The square was clogged. Mostly British
soldiers, sailors, and merchant seamen with a few
French, American and Russians, and
Eurasians. Ori eased through them to stand on the
edge of the promenade. He stared at the sea. The
sea had a three-foot swell and was black and
greasy. Northwards, half a mile away, he
could see the lights of the trading houses coming on, and
in the French Legation. And in the upper story of
Struan's that, with Brock's, dominated the
waterfront.
  Tonight? Should I try tonight?
  His feet began to take him that way. A sudden
rumbling and the sound like that of an express train just
a few feet below the surface rushed at them, the
earth heaved and with everyone else in the
square, he tottered, nauseated, and went down
on his hands and knees, holding on to the earth as it
shook and rose and fell and stopped. A moment of
silence that seemed to shriek to the skies. Now a
few whimpers and shouts and curses that were cut
short as another shock took them. Again the earth
reared, not as bad as before but bad enough, and the shakes
went on and on and heaved and shuddered and stopped.
Tiles cascaded off a roof. People scuttled or
crawled to safety. Silence again that was almost
palpable, men silent, gulls silent, animals
silent. Earth waiting everything waiting. Hugging the
ground, praying, cursing, praying. Waiting.
  "Is it over for God's sake?" someone
called out.
  "Yes ..."
  "No ..."
  "Wait I th--"
  Another rumble. Wails of fear. The noise
peaked, the earth twisted and cried out and became still
again. Several shacks collapsed. Shouts for
help. No one moved.
  Again everyone held their breath. Waiting.
Moans and prayers and whimpers and supplications
and curses. Waiting for the next one. The big
one. Waiting, but nothing more.
  Yet.
  Moments that became an eternity of waiting.
Then Ori sensed that it was over and got up, the first
in the square, heart dancing that he was not dead this
time, that he was alive and untouched and safely
reborn but instinctively ready for the next
danger, an immediate dash from fire that was a normal
aftermath and the greatest hazard to be endured. Every
earthquake was someone's nemesis, a rebirth for
all others and, from time immemorial, to be treated
as such by those who lived in the Land of the Gods that was
also called the Land of Tears.
  Abruptly Ori's stomach had a quake of
its own and fell away. Across the square, above the
mass of people still grounded, many retching and cursing, he
saw Hiraga standing alone watching him. Fifty
yards behind Hiraga most of the samurai guards were
also on their feet--some studying the two of them
curiously.
  At almost the same instant that Ori had sensed
the earthquake had ended and had jumped up,
Hiraga and the samurai had spontaneously done
the same, experiencing identical, ecstatic
relief and rebirth, Hiraga not
realizing he was on his feet until he saw
Ori staring at him. His face closed. At
once he started towards him, the square rapidly
coming to life as men noisily scrambled or staggered
erect. Blindly Ori took to his heels but
frightened angry men, some laughing hysterically,
others wailing thanks to God, barred his escape
--and Hiraga's pursuit--with cries of "Wot
the devil's up with you ..."
  "Who the hell're you pushing for crissake
..."
  "Hey, he's a bloody Jappo ..."
  Then someone bellowed, "FIRE! LOOK!"
  With everyone else Ori looked northwards.
At the other end of the promenade a building was on
fire. He recognized it as the two-story
Struan headquarters. Perhaps next door.
Careless of anyone Ori broke out of the throng in
a rush.
  Hiraga pushed forward after him but at that moment
a nearby gin bar collapsed, scattering people
into his path, sending him reeling and others
trampling him. He fought to his feet amidst the
uproar. In this part of the square men were milling around
aimlessly, blocking him. For a second he
caught a brief sight of Ori, then the ruins
of the bar began to blaze and the crowd surged
backwards again, engulfing him.
  When Hiraga had recovered his balance, Ori
was obscured and as much as he tried to force a path
in the direction of his last sighting, the less
progress he could make and the more furious the crowd
became: "Who you pushin' for crissake! ...
It's another bleeding Jappo ... Give the
bugger wot for ..."
  By the time he had placated them and retreated and
circled, finding a path out to the edge of the square,
Ori was not running down the promenade as he had
expected, heading for the fire, nor was he going
by way of the beach--but had truly vanished.

  In Struan's, Jamie McFay was running
up the stairs in the semi-darkness amid cries of
alarm and "Fire!" an oil lamp swinging in his
hand, only the chandelier alight in the whole
staircase area and it still swayed drunkenly from the
shocks. He gained the landing and ran down the
corridor to burst Struan's door open.
"Tai-pan, are you all right?"
  The room was in shadow but for an
ominous flickering glow that danced on the window
curtains. Struan lay on the floor, dazed,
half dressed for dinner, shaking his head to try
to clear it, both oil lamps shattered, the open
wick of one that was hidden by the bureau sputtered on
the oil-drenched carpet. "Think so," he gasped,
"must have hit my head when I got knocked over.
Christ Almighty, Angelique!"
  "Here let me help you ..."
  "I can manage, check her, Jamie!"
  Jamie tried the handle to the connecting door.
Bolted on the other side. At that moment the
carpet ignited, Struan scrambled out of the way,
cursing with pain, but before the blaze could spread
Jamie had stamped it out. In his haste to help
Struan out of the way, he dragged him up roughly.
  "Oh Jesus, watch it, Jamie!"
  "Sorry, sorry I didn't--"
  "Never mind," Struan panted, a stabbing pain
in his side where he had fallen heavily, more
throbbing in his stomach where there was none before and the
usual under the healed but angry scar. "Where's the
fire?"
  "I don't know, I was downstairs wh--"
  "Later--Angelique!"
  Jamie ran into the corridor, smoke from the
far end of the corridor making him cough. He
banged on her door then tried the handle--again
bolted on the inside. His shoulder smashed into the
wood near the jamb and the door flew open. Her
boudoir was empty, one oil lamp was on its
side still alight, oil dripping on to the curtained
bureau, another shattered on the floor, more oil
everywhere. He doused the burning wick and ran into the
bedroom. She was propped in the four-poster, as
pale as her peignoir, eyes fixed on the
swaying oil chandelier that was incongruously,
merrily alight.
  "You all right, Angelique?"
  "Oh, Jamie ..." she said hesitantly,
her voice sounding far away, "Yes I'm, I
was just, just lying down before dressing for dinner then the
room started rocking. I, I thought I was dreaming
then the lamps shattered and ... mon Dieu, it
was the noise of the building shifting that frightened me the
most ... Oh, is Malcolm ..."
  "Yes, best get dressed quick as you can.
Hurr--"
  The fire alarm bell at the nearby Harbor
Master's office began tolling,
startling them. With sudden apprehension she smelt the
smoke and heard the muffled shouts from outside and
saw the glow through the window curtains and gasped,
"We're on fire?"
  "Not to worry for the moment but best get dressed
quick as you can and come next door, I'll unbolt
the connecting door." He hurried out. She slid
out of bed. Under her peignoir she wore
pantaloons and boned chemise. Hastily she
stepped into her crinoline that was already laid out for her
and picked up a shawl.
  "She's all right, Tai-pan," she heard
Jamie say as he unbolted the connecting door.
"She's getting dressed, let me help you
downstair--"
  "When she's ready."
  Jamie started to say something, changed his mind,
both of them still conscious of their lunchtime clash and
neither prepared to compromise. He opened the window.
In the front garden and street below, clerks and
servants were milling around, Vargas amongst them,
onlookers and others from the various Legations
gathering, but no flames that he could see.
"Vargas!" he shouted. "Where's our fire?"
  "We're not sure, senhor, we think it's just
part of the roof. Men with the fire captain are already
there but Brock's upper story is alight."
  Jamie could not see next door so he
hurried back into Angelique's boudoir and
pulled the curtains aside. Fire had taken a
good hold of the front of Brock's--a
two-story structure similar to Struan's--where
the main bedrooms would be. Smoke billowed from the
open windows. He could see teams of men passing
along pails of water trying to douse the fire,
Norbert Greyforth supervising--the Brock
fire teams drilled as often and as ruthlessly as
he himself had drilled Struan's. Whipped by the
breeze, flames were being dragged with the smoke
to reach across the gap.
  Just my luck to be burned out by their godrotting
fire, he thought sourly then leaned out of the window.
"Vargas," he shouted, "get men and water up
here--douse this side! When we're clear, help
Norbert." I hope the bugger burns and all of
Brock's with him, that'd solve the stupid duel
for all time.
  There were no other fires that he could see from here,
other than one far down the promenade in Drunk
Town and two in the Yoshiwara. The
smell of burning wood and oil and clothing and the tar
that they used on the roofs overpowered everything though
there was a taste of sea salt on the breeze.
Inexorably his attention went back to the flames
from Brock's that sought them. The wind pushed the
flames closer. He willed them to die,
afraid of fire--the croft that he had been born
in had burned one foul winter night when he was a
child, his father dead drunk as usual and his younger
brother consumed, he and his mother and sister barely
escaping with their lives and little else, soon to go
to the work house and vile years until they were
rescued by Campbell Struan, kinsman of
Dirk Struan, on whose land his father had toiled.
  "Vargas! Hurry up for Christ's sake!"
  "Coming, senhor!"
  Now the promenade was packed, everyone in the
streets ready to help and give advice, others
with much shouting forming a water bucket line from the
huge fire tank of sea water that was within easy
reach, army units from the tented barracks joining the
throng. Samurai were running towards them from the
North Gate to help--any fire a threat to them
also. Southwards, and on the other side of the
canal, one of the Yoshiwara houses was burning
brightly, more cries and alarm drifting on the wind,
but that blaze seemed contained and not a major
danger and, thankfully, nowhere near where Nemi
would be.
  The sweat was pouring down his back. He felt
sick with relief that Malcolm was safe. Since
lunch he had been brooding in his office,
furious his search for prospectors had leaked,
beside himself with worry over the duel, and his future.
Never once had he conceived he would ever be involved
in such a quarrel, or be forced to leave the Noble
House, or Japan, except for ill health or
an accident, before retiring in five years at the
ripe age of forty-four after twenty-five good
years of service, rung by rung. Now, with
Malcolm alienated, and Tess Struan
furious with him, his promotion, retirement--his
whole future was in jeopardy.
  What to do, he had been worrying, then the
shocks turned the world upside down, his
precarious mortality had been rammed home
to him again and then, when the jolts had ceased and he
could reel to his feet, his glands and the memory of the
debts he and his family owed the Struans had
sent him scurrying upstairs,
petrified for Malcolm's safety--after all
he was in charge and this youth little more than an
invalid. Tai-pan? Sorry, Malcolm,
Norbert's right, your ma's in command. If you
hadn't been wounded you'd have rushed back to Hong
Kong when she said, none of this would have happened,
you'd be taking over the reins and in a year or so
you'd--
  "Jamie ... could you do me up?"
  Blankly he turned. Angelique was standing
at the doorway, back towards him, the front
of the off-the-shoulder crinoline held up and the back
open. For a second he almost shouted at her, That
bloody dress's crazy for Christ's sake,
we're on fire! But he did not, just hastily
did up the top button and shoved a shawl around
her and hurried her into the next room where she at
once went into Struan's open arms. A team of
men rushed past the open door with full buckets.
"Best get out, sir ..." someone shouted.
  "Time to go, Tai-pan, all right?"
  "Yes." Malcolm went for the door as quickly
as he could. With his two sticks he was slow--
disastrously slow had there been a real emergency which
all three of them knew, Struan most of all.
Now there was tramping above them in the attics, men
pounding, the smell of smoke worse, adding to their
anxiety.
  "Jamie, take Angelique out, I'll
make my own time."
  "Lean on me an--"
  "For Christ's sake do it, then come back if
you must!"
  Jamie flushed. He took her arm and the two
of them hurried out, men overtaking them with empty
buckets, others staggering in with a full load.
  The moment he was alone, Struan groped back
to his chest of drawers, rummaged under some clothes
and found the small bottle that Ah Tok had
refilled this afternoon. He swigged half of the
brownish liquid, re-corked it and put it in the
pocket of his frock coat, sighing with relief.
  Angelique swept down the staircase and out
through the front doors. The clean air was
welcome. "Vargas!" Jamie called out.
"Look after Miss Angelique for a moment."
  "Certainly, senhor."
  "Please allow me, Monsieur," Pierre
Vervene, the French official said grandly. "I
will escort Mademoiselle
Angelique to our Legation--she can wait there in
safety."
  "Thanks." Jamie rushed back inside.
  Now she could see that their roof was burning, not
too badly at the moment, but not far away from their
suites, the flames from Brock's still licking the
side of their building. Well-trained samurai,
kimonos tucked out of their way and masked against
smoke inhalation, had ladders against one of the
walls. Some scaled it as others with signs and
shouts motioned men to bring buckets that were quickly
handed to the topmost man who hurled them where they would
do most good. An angry shaft of flame sought
him but he ducked, covered his face and held on,
then once more went back to fire fighting. She
caught her breath, thinking how strong and brave the
man was and how helpless Struan had become, how
little he could do to protect her in an emergency,
how he was more and more of a weight, more and more of an
invalid, every day more querulous and less and less
fun. What of my future? A tremor went
through her.
  "Nothing to worry about, Mademoiselle,"
Vervene said in French, a tassled cap covering
his bald pate. "Come along, you're quite safe.
Earthquakes are really quite normal here." He
took her arm to lead her up the promenade through the
men swarming the front, watching or fighting the
fire.
  Ori had seen her the moment she came into the
street.
  He was on the edge of the crowd in the neck of the
alley beside the French Legation near the North
Gate. His laborer's clothes and cap were not much
different from those of many men around him, camouflaging
him well. From this position he could see most of the
promenade, the front of Struan's and the street
beside it that came up from the village main street.
  He stopped staring at her and scanned all
around, seeking Hiraga or Akimoto, sure that
they were lurking somewhere near or soon would be, his
heart still pounding from his frantic run through Drunk
Town and into the village. The moment he had seen
the Struan fire and the open length of the promenade
he knew that he was doomed to be caught if he
tried that way or the beach--and no time to fetch
Timee to act as guard or rear guard.
  Not that I could ever trust those dogs, he thought,
his heart grinding even more heavily at the nearness of
her.
  She was only twenty yards away.
  Those who saw her doffed their hats and murmured
greetings that she absently returned. Ori could
easily have gone deeper into safety but he did
not, just took off his hat like the others and looked.
Short beard, strong face, curious eyes, his
hair short but groomed. Her eyes flowed over
him but she did not really see him, nor did
Vervene who was chattering pleasantly in French.
  They passed within a few yards. Ori waited
until they had gone into the French Legation--no
sentries there now, all had gone to join the fire
fight--then he trudged away, down the alley.
The moment he was sure no one was watching he
scaled the Legation fence as he had done before and
went into the previous ambush under her window. Tonight
the shutters were unbarred and open. So was the inner
door. He could see across the room into the
corridor and caught sight of them going into a
room opposite. The door was ajar.
  Now that he was safe and unobserved Ori
checked his derringer and made sure his knife was
loose in its holster. Then he squatted on his
heels, took a deep breath and began to think.
From the moment he had seen Hiraga and, almost at
once, the Struan fire, he had blindly allowed
his instincts to guide him. That's no longer any
good, he told himself.
  Now I must plan. And quickly.
  The open shutters were the magnet. He slid
over the lintel into the room.

                 

  "Why not sleep here tonight, Mademoiselle,
Monsieur Struan? We've plenty of
room," Vervene said.
  It was near dinnertime and they were in the main
reception room of the French Legation having
champagne and Jamie had just arrived to report that
their fire was out, nothing serious except some water
damage in her suite, a little in Struan's.
"If you want you can have my rooms, Tai-pan,"
Jamie said. "I'll bunk elsewhere, and Miss
Angelique can have Vargas's room."
  "There's no need for that, Jamie,"
Angelique said. "We can stay here, no need
to disrupt everyone. I was moving here tomorrow anyway.
Yes, ch@eri?"
  "I think I'd be more comfortable in my
own suite. It's all right, Jamie?"
  "Oh yes, hardly touched. Miss
Angelique, would you like my rooms then?"
  "No Jamie, I'll be fine here tonight."
  "Good then that's settled," Struan said, eyes
strange and feeling very tired, most of his pain still
drowned by the opium, but not his deep-set rage
over Norbert Greyforth.
  "Monsieur Struan, you are certainly
welcome to stay too," Vervene said. "We have
rooms enough as the Minister and his staff are at Yedo
for a few days."
  "Oh!" Angelique was openly shocked. Tomorrow
Andr`e had to collect the medicine. They all
stared at her. "But Andr`e told me, he told
me they were all returning by the latest early tomorrow,
after today's meeting with the Sh@ogun."
  "It depends on the Sh@ogun's punctuality
and how the meeting goes--and our hosts are
international models for punctuality, eh?"
Vervene chuckled at his own joke, adding grandly,
"You never know how State Occasions will turn out.
It may take a day, even a week. Another
brandy, Monsieur Struan?"
  "Thanks, yes tha--"
  "But Andr`e said the meeting was this morning and
they'd be back at the latest tomorrow." She fought the
tears that threatened to spill down her cheeks.
  "What the devil's the matter, Angel?"
Struan said testily. "Does it matter when they
come back?"
  "It ... no, no but, but I, I just hate it
when someone says something and it's not true."
  "You were probably mistaken, ridiculous
to be upset about such an unimportant matter."
Struan took a large swallow of his refilled
glass. "For goodness' sake, Angel!"
  "Perhaps they'll be back tomorrow,
Mademoiselle," Vervene said, ever the
diplomat. Stupid cow, however delectable her
breasts and kissable her lips, as if it matters.
"Never mind," he said with his most oily smile,
"dinner will be served within the hour. Monsieur
McFay, you will join us, bien s@ur?"
  "Thank you no, I'd best be going."
McFay hesitated at the door. "Tai-pan,
shall I, er, shall I come back for you?"
  "I'm capable of walking two hundred yards
by myself," Struan snapped. "Perfectly
capable!" And of pulling a bloody
trigger tonight or any night, he wanted to shout after
him.
  Just before coming over here Norbert Greyforth had
taken a respite, the Brock fire almost under
control, and, unnoticed by him, had walked out into the
street. Jamie, beside him, was directing Vargas
and fire fighters, Dr. Hoag and Dr.
Babcott nearby, tending burns and a few
broken bones.
  Ah Tok's elixir had worked its usual
magic and he was feeling fine and confident, though
strange and wanting to sleep as always--he had been
fantasizing, to sleep perchance to dream, to dream
about loving, about connecting with the Japanese girl
or Angelique with ever greater passion, their need
as great as mine and ever more erotic. Then,
abruptly, he had been jerked into the vicious
present.
  "Evening, Jamie. Proper bugger, eh?"'
  "Ah, Norbert," Struan said,
politeness helped by the euphoria. "Sorry
about your bad joss. I think th--"'
  Norbert pointedly ignored him,
"Fortunately, Jamie, no damage to our
offices or warehouse, or trade goods or
strong rooms you'll be happy to hear--just in my
sleeping quarters." Then he feigned to see
Struan for the first time and his voice became louder and
taunting for others to hear. "Well, well, if
it isn't the young tai-pan of the Oh So Noble
House himself. Top of the evening to you, laddie, you
don't look so good--is your milk off?"'
  Struan's bonhomie had vanished. Through his
opiate screen he realized he was confronting
evil and his enemy was there in front of him.
"No, but your manners are."
  "Manners are not your strong suit,
laddie." Norbert laughed. "Yes, we're
not harmed, laddie. In fact our new mining
ventures make us Noble House in Japan and
we'll have Hong Kong by Christmas. Best
toddle home, Malcolm."
  "The name's Struan," he said, seeing himself
tall, strong and omnipotent, not quite aware of
others around him or that Jamie and Babcott were
trying to intervene. "Struan!"
  "I like young Malcolm, young Malcolm."
  "Next time you call me that I'll call you
a motherless bastard and blow your head off without waiting
for your seconds, by God."
  Now there was a pit of silence around them. The
crackle of flames and the soft, baiting hiss of the
wind only enhanced it. The news of the lunchtime
challenge had spread within minutes and all waited
for the next move in the game that had been brooding
since Malcolm's grandfather, Dirk Struan,
died before he could kill Tyler Brock as he had
sworn to do.
  Norbert Greyforth's mind was working hard.
Once again he measured his future and his position
in Brock's, considering carefully what he should
do--the stakes immense. He was well compensated
--so long as he obeyed orders. Tyler
Brock's last letter had opened a door
to paradise, telling him bluntly to "ride
Malcolm Struan to the limit while he be
sick, wounded, and unprotected by my hellcat
daughter, God curse her to Hell! There be
five thousand guinea a year for ten year if that
stripling be crushed while he be in the Japans--
thee be taking any measure thee be wanting."
  Norbert would be thirty-one in six days.
By forty, the normal retirement age, the average
China trader was old. Five thousand for ten years
was truly a princely sum, enough for him and all his
generations, enough to buy a seat in Parliament,
to become gentry, a squire with a manor house,
married to a young bride with a fine dowry of good
Surrey land.
  It was easy to decide. He put his face
close to Struan's and was happy to see the pain
under the taut skin--of a height with him now that
Struan hunched over his sticks. "Listen, young
Malcolm, you tossed brandy in my face for
lunch, you can kiss my arse for supper."
  "You-sir-are-a-motherless-bastard!"
  The older man laughed, a cruel jeering
laugh. "You're an even bigger motherless bastard,
in fact y--"'
  Babcott moved between them, his great height and
size dwarfing them. "Stop it, both of you," he
said angrily, "both of you! This is a public
place and these quarrels should be settled in
private as between gentlemen."
  "He's not a bloody gen--"'
  "In private as gentlemen, Malcolm,"
Babcott said louder. "Norbert, what's your
pleasure?"'
  "A duel's not my choice but it's what this
bastard wants, so be it! Tonight, tomorrow,
sooner the better."
  "Not tonight, tomorrow, or any day, duelling's against
the law, but I will be at your office at
eleven." Babcott looked at Struan, knowing
that no one here could prevent a duel if that was their
mutual wish. He saw the dilated pupils and
was sad for him and furious with him. Both he and
Hoag had long since diagnosed the addiction but
nothing they did or said had made any
impression, nor could they prevent access to the
drug. "I'll see you at noon, Malcolm.
In the meantime, as the senior British Official
still in Yokohama, you are both ordered neither
to address each other, or attack each other, in
private or in public ..."
  Never mind about bloody Babcott, Struan
was thinking now, even more confident, the brandy mixing
nicely with the opiate. Tomorrow or the next day
you'll send Jamie, no, send Dmitri to see
Norbert--not Jamie, he's no longer to be
trusted. We'll do it near the race course and the
Noble House will give Norbert a noble funeral
--and bloody Brock too if he ever comes here,
by God! They've both forgotten you were the best
revolver shot at Eton, and duelled that sod
Percy Quill for calling you a Chinaman.
Killed him too and was sent down for it, though the
affair was hushed up and settled by Papa for a few
thousand guineas. Norbert will get his comeuppance
...
  A stir in the room distracted him. Seratard
had just come in and was surrounded and being greeted by the
others, Andr`e Poncin behind him. Through his mist he
heard Seratard saying the Yedo meeting had been
concluded quickly after "we broke the deadlock and
French compromises were accepted so no need to stay
..."
  His ears stopped listening as his eyes focused
on Andr`e. The taut, sharp-featured,
straight-backed handsome Frenchman was smiling at
Angelique who was smiling back more happily
than she had for days. Jealousy began to swamp
him but he put it away. Not her fault, he
thought wearily, or Andr`e's, she's worth
smiling at and I'm not good company and not myself, just
sick to death of the pain and being helpless. God but
I love that woman and need her to death.
  He struggled up, made his excuses and
thanked them for their hospitality. Seratard was his
usual charming self. "But surely
you'll stay? So sorry about the fire--we felt
none of the earthquake at sea, not even a swell
of any sort. Don't worry about your
fianc@ee, we'll be delighted to have her company,
Monsieur, as long as necessary while your apartments
are repaired, of course you are welcome any
time." He saw them to the door, Angelique
insisting on taking Struan's arm to walk him
home.
  "I'm fine, Angel," Struan said, loving
her.
  "Of course, my love, but it's my
pleasure," she said, bursting with goodwill now that
Andr`e had returned. Only a few more hours and
then I am free.

  Dinner was a great success with Angelique
radiant, Seratard full of himself at his
success in Yedo, regaling them with his exploits
in Algiers where he had been an official in
charge of subjugation before this appointment, Vervene
all the time vying for her attention to tell heroic
versions of what he had previously achieved,
all of them flushed by her company and abundant
wine, a bottle of Burgundy per man, with
champagne before to tickle the taste buds, and now
again to settle the stomach. Then Andr`e Poncin
began telling saucy tales of Hong Kong,
Shanghai, and Kowloon where villagers from time
to time really believed the Penis Plague was with them
again when that appendage would disappear back into their
bodies, so all the men would tie a string around it,
anchoring it tightly to their necks to prevent the
catastrophe.
  "Oh, that's impossible, Andr`e, and naughty
of you!" she said, her fan fluttering, amidst
laughter and his protests that this was the absolute
truth, sure it was now time for her to leave. She
finished her second tall glass of champagne
that went nicely with the previous three goblets of
Ch`ateau d'Arcins, more than mellow herself--her
relief that Andr`e had come back when he had
promised, and her pleasure at speaking French
for the whole evening, had overcome her usual
caution, "Now I will leave you to your cigars and
brandy--and naughty stories!"
  "But only for a moment," Seratard said.
"Andr`e is going to play for us."
  "Tonight, no," Andr`e said, too quickly. "If
you don't mind, there are some papers I
must ready for tomorrow, sorry."
  "Everything can wait, pleasure before business,"
Seratard said as a genial order. "Tonight we must
have music to finish the evening, something romantic for
Angelique."
  "Let him have some peace, Henri," she said, the
wine making her cheeks rosy, delighted that
Andr`e was clearly anxious to fetch the promised
medicine. "You've taken him from his business long
enough, after all he's not an official."
  "Andr`e will adore to play for us."
  "Ah, so Andr`e is always to be commanded, yes?
Then I must command you, Monsieur le Ministre,
to excuse him this once ... and me too, it's time
for my bed." She got up, her knees a little
weak. They surrounded her, protesting loudly.
"But I'm here tomorrow and for at least three days."
She offered her hand to Andr`e with a special
smile, "Now you are free to go, I command you
to guard our interests."
  "You may count on it, Angelique."
  "A last glass ..."
  She allowed herself to be persuaded to take it with
her and they escorted her to ensure the bolts on the
windows and new shutters of the boudoir and bedroom
were secure.
  "We decided to replace all our shutters
since you were last here." Vervene said again what he
had already told her earlier, his sparce hair
awry, beaming tipsily, "even in last week's
storm there were no rattles." All eyes
noticed the filmy green peignoir and
nightdress laid out on the bed that had been
turned down invitingly by the heavyset maid who
watched and waited balefully. Dimmed oil
lamps and their alcoholic haze, made the room
all the more enticing and her more provocative.
  More reluctant good nights and sweet dreams
and then she was alone with Ah Soh, the door to the
corridor bolted. The maid undressed her and
brushed her hair and put her crinoline away in
the deep hanging cupboard with her other clothes,
lingerie in the chest of drawers, all the while
Angelique humming happily, content to be here,
safe for tomorrow, elated to be alone and that the fire and
earthquake had not harmed any of them or interfered
with her plan but had made it simpler.
  I will make peace between Malcolm and Jamie,
bad for them to be estranged, she thought
exhilarated, still thirsty, but smoothed and
wine content. Thank God for Andr`e. I wonder
what the Yoshiwara's like, and his girl. I'll
encourage him to tell me about her and we can laugh
together ...
  "'nite, Missee" interrupted her. Ah
Soh was walking ponderously for the boudoir couch.
The last time her maid had slept there, even with the
bedroom door closed, her snores had been
deafening, further disturbing her.
  "No, Ah Soh, no sleep here! You go,
come back chop chop with coffee-ah, morning,
heya?"
  The woman shrugged. "'nite, Missee."
  Angelique bolted the door after her and in the
warm light, completely and peacefully alone at
last, lazily twirled to a hummed waltz. In
a moment her ears caught the muted notes of the
piano. Ah, it's Henri, she thought,
recognizing his touch. He's a good player,
better than Vervene but not to be compared with Andr`e.
Chopin. Soft, delicate, romantic.
  She swayed in time with the lovely melody, then
caught sight of herself in the tall mirror. For a
moment she studied herself, this way and that, then cupped
her breasts higher as she and Colette used to do,
pouting this way and that to see if that made them seem
more desirable or less.
  A sip of champagne, the bubbles tickling, the
music and the alcohol nudging her. A sudden
excited impulse and she let the peignoir
fall, then slowly slid her nightdress higher
and higher, coquetting the mirror image,
admiring the legs and loins and hips and breasts and
now full nakedness of the other person, posing this
way and that, using the bunched nightdress
to obscure or to reveal.
  Another sip of champagne. Then she dipped
a finger into it and put the liquid on her hardened
nipples as she had read the great Parisian
courtesans would do, sometimes using sweet
Ch`ateau d'allyquem there and in other places.
Curious that our two most famous courtesans in
the center of the world are English.
  She chuckled to herself, possessed by the night and the
music and the wine. When I have birthed one or two
sons and am say twenty-one and Malcolm has
a mistress and I am ready for my special
lover, that's what I'll do--for his pleasure and
mine, and before that for Malcolm's.
  Another sip and another and then
finished, languidly licking the last drop, then,
watching her mirror, curling her tongue around the
glass, toying with it. Chuckling again, putting the
glass back on the dressing table, letting it
fall unnoticed to the carpet, ears only tuned
to Chopin and his underlying passions--eyes fixed on
the mirror, now the reflected image close,
brazenly intimate.
  Lazily she leaned forward and turned down the
wick, shadows kinder now, then moved back a
little, the mirror person still there, lovely,
voluptuous. Fingers moving with a life of their own,
straying, caressing, heart picking up tempo,
fluttering with growing pleasure. Eyes closed
now, imagining Malcolm tall, strong, very
strong, sweet-smelling, leading her into the
bedroom, laying her on the coverlets, lying with
her, as naked as she, his fingers wandering, fondling.
  Ori had eased the door of the cupboard open in
the other room and moved noiselessly and now stood
in the deep shadows near the half-open doorway
watching her, heart pounding in his ears. It had been
easy for him to hide among the cases and hanging
dresses and crinolines, easy to slide further
into hiding to become invisible when the maid opened the
cupboard door and closed it again. Easy to hear
the final bolts ring home and to judge when
Angelique was truly alone.
  In the bedroom half light she lay on the
sheets, eyes closed, a little shudder from time to time,
face in shadow, body part in shadow, shadows
dancing as the small flame moved with the air
currents. It seemed to him he waited an
eternity. Soundlessly, he stepped out of the darkness
to the threshold. The door clicked closed. The
distant music cut. Her eyes opened and
focused and she saw him.
  Some sense told her that this was him--the murderer
from the Tokaid@o, father of the child that was never to be, who
had violated her but had left no memory of
pain or ravishment, only erotic half dreams,
sleeping, waking--and that she was defenseless and tonight
he would murder her.
  Both were hardly breathing. Motionless. Waiting
for the other to move. Still in shock, she saw his youth,
not much older than she, a little taller, sheathed
sword-knife in his belt, right hand on the hilt,
neat short beard and hair, broad shoulders and
narrow hips, rough shirt, flapped breeches,
strong calves and legs and peasant
sandals. Face in shadow.
  This's another dream, surely it's a
dream, no need to be afraid ...
  Bewildered, she propped her head on one hand,
motioning him to move into the light.
  Momentarily fused into the same unreal,
dreamlike state as she, his feet obeyed and when
she saw the chiselled features, so different and
alien, the dark eyes so filled with craving, she
opened her mouth to say, Who are you, what's your
name, but he thought she was going to scream so he leapt
forward in panic, the naked blade violently at
her throat.
  "No, please," she gasped, backed into the
pillow, and when he did not understand she shook her
head, petrified, eyes pleading, every part of her
shrieking, You're going to die, there's no escape
this time! "No--please."
  The fright slid off his face and, standing over her,
heart thundering as hers was thundering, he put a finger
to his lips, warning her to be silent and not
to scream, not to move. "Iy`e," he whispered
hoarsely, adding, "No!"
  A drop of perspiration slid down his cheek.
  "I ... I won't, won't make a sound,"
she muttered, terror confusing her. She pulled the
sheet over her loins. At once he ripped it
away. Her heart stopped. But in that second she
knew, a primeval instinct in mind had
propelled her to a different plane and she felt
herself possessed by a latent, newfound knowledge. Her
horror began to slide away. Inner voices
seemed to whisper: Be careful, we can guide you.
Watch his eyes, don't make a sudden move,
first the knife ...
  Heart pounding, she watched his eyes and put a
finger to her lips as he had done, gently pointed
at the blade and motioned it away.
  He was like a coiled spring, expecting her
to dart for the door any second and scream--he
knew he could silence her easily, but that did not
fit into his plan: she was to flee for the door in his
time not hers and scream and scream to wake the enemy,
then he would slash once and make sure and then he
would wait and when they arrived he would shout,
"Sonno-joi" turning the knife on himself and,
spitting in their faces, die. That was his plan--
one of many he had considered: taking her wildly
then killing her and then himself, or just killing her
silently at once as he should have done
before, however much he wanted her now, leaving the
Tokaid@o characters on the sheets as before, then
to escape through the window. But she was not reacting as
he had expected. Unwavering eyes, her hand
motioning the blade away, sky blue eyes
asking, not begging, tension there, but no terror now.
Uncanny half smile. Why?
  The blade did not move.
  Be patient, the voices whispered to her ...
  Again she gestured the point away, unhurried,
willing him. His eyes narrowed even more. With an
effort he tore them away from hers to surge over
her to be inexorably drawn back. What is
she planning? Warily he lowered the dirk and
waited, ready to lunge.
  He was standing close to the bed. Leisurely her
hands began to unbutton his shirt, then froze.
The cross at his neck flickered in the light,
her cross. The suddenness that the lost forever was
miraculously found again, elated her strangely
and, dreamlike, she watched her fingers touch it,
trembling slightly, weirdly pleased that he had
taken it to wear it, part of her around him forever as part
of him was around her forever but even the cross, her
cross, did not deflect her.
  Gently she eased the shirt off, down his right
arm, over the knife, tightly held and a constant
threat. Her intent look drifted over him, the
shoulder wound, freshly healed, muscled body.
Again the wound.
  "Tokaid@o," she said softly, not as a question
though he took it as such.
  "Hai," he muttered, watching and waiting and
choked with lust. "Hai."
  Again the cross glittered. "Kanagawa?"
  He nodded, hardly breathing, spellbound, and
she was glad that she had been right in the first instant,
and now that he was almost naked she was more secure with the
plan that had swamped her mind. She reached out and
touched his belt, always watching his eyes, and felt
a tiny tremor. A current went through her at this
victory.
  Don't be afraid, the voices said. Continue
...
  His fingers found the buckle. It loosened. The
belt dropped away, the scabbard with it. His
breeches slid off him. Below he wore a
loincloth. With a grinding effort he remained
motionless, his weight balanced on both legs,
slightly apart, and body throbbing with his
heartbeat, eyes locked.
  Continue, the voices whispered, don't be
afraid ...
  Abruptly, the image of him in the web that
myriad generations of women before her--defenseless in
the same mantrap--were aiding her to weave,
caused her resolve to soar unexpectedly,
heightening her awareness, making her part of the night
and yet apart, to watch herself and him, and fingers
untying the string and seeing him unadorned.
  She had never seen a man thus. But for the wound
he was without blemish. As she was.
  For a moment he continued to dominate his lust, then
his will vanished and he threw the knife on the bed and
covered her but she closed like an oyster and twisted
away and he did likewise, grabbing for the knife
before she did but she had not made a move toward
it, just lay there, watching him kneeling on the bed,
blade poised, another phallus pointing at
her.
  In the waking dream, she shook her head,
telling him to lay the knife aside, to forget it,
to lie down beside her. "There's no hurry," she
said softly, knowing he would not understand words, only
gestures. "Lie here." She showed him where.
"No, be gentle." She showed him how. "Kiss
me ... no, not so cruel ... gently."
  She showed him everything she wanted, he wanted,
advancing, retreating, soon to be aroused and then,
when at last they joined she imploded to carry him
over the crest and them into the abyss.
  When her panting had lessened and her ears could
hear, the music was still playing but far away. No
sounds of danger, only his panting matching hers,
body light, fitting perfectly. Belonging. That
was what she could not understand--how or why he seemed
to belong. Or how and why she could be so thrilled,
or consumed with such ecstasy. He began to ease
away.
  No, the voices told her quickly, hold him,
don't let him move, beware, the danger's not
over, stay with the plan ...
  So her arms tightened around him.
  They slept for an hour or so and when she
awoke he was lying beside her, breathing softly, his
sleeping face young and untroubled, one hand tight
on the knife, the other touching her cross that he
wore so easily.
  It was my first gift, Maman told me, the
first day of my life and worn ever
since, only the chain changing. Is it his now, or
mine, or ours?
  His eyes opened and a shiver went through her.
  For a moment he was not sure where he was, or
if it was a dream and then he saw her, still
beautiful, still desirable, still beside him, the strange,
half smile washing over him. Enchanted, his hand
went to her and she responded, to coalesce again but
now without anger or haste. Only to prolong.
  Afterwards, barely awake, he wanted to tell
her how vast the Clouds and the Rain had been, how
much he admired her and thanked her--beset with a
great sadness that he had to end her life, this life.
But not sad that his own death was near. Now, because of
her, he would die fulfilled, her death
sanctifying the just cause of Sonno-joi.
  Ah, he thought with sudden warmth, in return for
such a gift perhaps an equal gift, a samurai
gift, a samurai death: no screams or
terror, one moment alive the next dead. Why
not?
  Completely at peace, hand on unsheathed
knife, he allowed himself to stray into dreamlessness.


  Her fingers touched him. Instantly he was
awake, on guard, fingers tight on his knife.
He saw her gesture at the curtained and
shuttered window, a finger to her lips. Outside
whistling was approaching. The sound passed, then went
away.
  She sighed, then leaned over and snuggled
close, kissed his chest, then, so happily,
pointed at the clock on her dresser that read
4:16 A.m., again at the window. She slid out
of bed and with signs, made him understand that he was
to dress and to leave now and to return with the night, that
the shutters would be unbarred. He shook his head,
pretending to tease her, and she ran back, shadows
and the sight of her delighting him, to kneel beside the
bed and whisper, pleading with him, "Please ...
please ..."
  His spirit twisted. Never in his life had he seen
that expression on a woman's face before, such an
open depth of passion beyond his ken--no word for
love, not in Japanese. It swamped him but
did not deflect his decision.
  Easy to pretend to assent, to agree to go,
to return with nightfall. As he dressed she
stayed very close, helping him,
reluctant to let him go, wanting him to stay,
completely protective. Finger to her lips,
almost childlike, she moved the curtains aside,
opened the windows soundlessly, unbarred the shutters
and peered out.
  The air was clean. A hint of dawn. Sky
speckled with clouds. Sea calm and no sound or
sight of danger, only the sigh of the waves on the
sandy beach. Along High Street only threads
of smoke remained of the fires. No one about, the
Settlement was at peace, asleep.
  He stood close behind her and realized this was the
perfect moment. His hand angled the blade,
knuckles white. But he did not strike for as
she turned her tenderness and concern obliterated his
resolve, that and the lust that still obsessed him.
Quickly she kissed him, then she leaned out again and
peered both ways to make sure it was safe,
"No, not yet," she murmured anxiously,
making him wait, her arm around his waist.
  And when she was sure, she turned again and kissed
him again, then she motioned him to hurry. He
stepped silently over the lintel and the moment he was
safe in the garden, she slammed the shutters
closed and the bolt home and her screams tore through
the night, "Helppppp meeee ..."
  Ori was paralyzed. But only for a moment.
Blinded by rage he clawed at the shutters, her
continuing screams and the knowledge he had been duped sending
him berserk. Fingers now talons ripped a
shutter open, almost tore it off its hinges. At
that second the first of the French sentries hurtled
around the corner, rifle armed and ready. Ori
saw him and was faster and jerked out the derringer and
pulled the trigger but missed with both barrels never
having fired a gun before, the bullets whining off the
brickwork into the night.
  The sentry did not miss the first time or the
second time or the third and in the room
Angelique cowered with her hands over her ears,
exulted, forlorn, not knowing what to think, what to do,
whether she was laughing or crying, only that she had
won and now she was safe and revenged, all the time
the inner voices rejoicing, You've won, well
done, you were marvelous, wonderful, you followed the
plan perfectly, you're safe, you're safe now
from him forever!
  "Am I?" she whimpered.
  Oh yes, you're safe, he's dead, of
course there's always a price but don't
worry, don't be afraid ...
  What price? What ... Oh God I
forgot the cross, he still has my cross!
  Amid the growing uproar outside and the hammering
on her door, she began to tremble. Violently.

                 

    Friday, 7th November:
  In the afternoon H.m.s. Pearl returned from
Yedo with all sails set and hurtled for her
usual mooring in Yokohama's busy harbor.
Sir William's flag was at the masthead,
other flags demanded his cutter immediately but these were
unnecessary as his longboat was already waiting in the
roads, the Struan steam cutter beside her--
Jamie impatient in the stern. All those ashore
who saw Pearl watched to see if her Captain
was up to his arrogant dash, the wind frisky and
his speed under sail making the maneuver dicey.
Her bow wave was high, the sea good. At the last
second she spun into wind and stayed there quivering,
her bowsprit perfectly over her buoy just
alee. At once smartly dressed sailors
dropped rope hawsers over the bollard and made
her secure while others went aloft to furl all
sails.
  Not bad at all, Jamie thought proudly, then
called out, "Full ahead, get alongside,"
needing to be first at the gangplank to intercept
Sir William as Malcolm had ordered.
"Hurry it up, Tinker, for Christ's sake!"
  "Aye aye, sorr!" Tinker, the Struan
coxswain, beamed toothlessly, anticipating him
with throttles full forward. He was an old hand,
a pigtailed, tattooed, greying bosun's
mate off one of their clippers and he zipped
passed Sir William's eight-oared cutter
to their chagrin, spat tobacco juice
good-naturedly, gave them the finger and took
possession of the slot. Jamie jumped on to the
gangway. At the main deck he raised his top
hat to the officer of the deck, a fresh-faced
midshipman. "Permission come aboard, message
for Sir William."
  The midshipman saluted him back.
"Certainly, sir."
  "What is it, Jamie, what the devil's
wrong now?" Sir William called down from the
bridge, Phillip Tyrer and
Captain Marlowe beside him.
  "Sorry, sir, the Settlement's in a bit
of an uproar and Mr. Struan thought I should
give you the details."
  Marlowe said, "You can use my cabin, Sir
William."
  "Thank you. Best you come along too, after all
you're "Admiral in charge of our Naval
Defense," however temporary."
  Marlowe laughed. "I could certainly use the
salary, sir, if not the rank, however
temporary."
  "Wouldn't we all! Come along, you too,
Phillip." They followed him, Marlowe last.
Before Marlowe left the bridge, he beckoned his
Number One. "Engine room to get steam up,
all cannon cleaned, oiled and made ready,
ship's company prepared for battle stations."
  In the small, austere stern cabin, with a bunk,
private head and chart table, they sat down.
"Well, Jamie?"
  "First, Sir William, the tai-pan and all
traders want to congratulate you on a
successful meeting."
  "Thank you. What uproar?"
  "There's been trouble: early this morning a
Jappo tried to break into Angelique's
bedroom in the French Legation, the sentries shot
him, killed him. Dr. Hoag and Dr.
Babcott w--"
  "Christ Almighty, was she hurt? Touched?"
  To their relief Jamie shook his head, "No
sir, she said she heard him fumbling with the shutters
and began screaming bloody murder an--"
  "Then it was someone, like last time!" Tyrer
burst out, "not the wind rattling the shutters!"
  "We're inclined to think so." Jamie ran on
quickly, "Babcott and Hoag were summoned--she
was in shock, not hurt as I said but shaking. They
took a look at the dead man and at once
Hoag said he was the same bugger he operated on
in Kanagawa ..." Phillip Tyrer gasped
and Marlowe looked at him quickly, "... the same
we suspect was one of Canterbury's
murderers, same man who might have been at our
Kanagawa Legation and Captain Marlowe and
Pallidar tried to catch."
  "I'll be damned!" Sir William glanced
at Tyrer who had blanched. "Do you think you could
identify him, Phillip?"
  "I don't know, I don't think so.
Malcolm might be able to, I don't know."
  Sir William's mind had hurled him
onwards: If this is the same man then both
probable murderers are dead so how does this
affect our demand for indemnity? "French
Legation, eh? Astonished they shot the bugger, their
security's abominable at the best of times and
marksmanship worse. But why was the man there, was
he after her or what?"
  "We've no idea, sir. It also turns out
he was Catholic--at least he was wearing a
cross. Wh--"
  "That's curious! But ... but wait a minute,
Angelique there? I thought she had moved back
to Struan's."
  "She had but her quarters were fire damaged.
I forgot to mention, after the earthquake, sir, we
had a small fire, us and also Norbert. The--"
  "Anyone hurt?"
  "No sir, thank God, nor anywhere in the
Settlement far as we know. The French offered her
accommodation but th--"
  "Was Malcolm Struan staying there too?"
  Jamie sighed at the continual interruptions,
"No sir, he was at our place."
  "Then you can't have had much damage."
  "No sir, fortunately, and not much in the whole
Settlement though Norbert lost most of his upper
floor."
  "Well, that should please you. So the girl
wasn't touched, the assailant's dead so what's
the fuss about?"
  "I've been trying to tell you, sir,"
Jamie said then rushed on, refusing this time to be
interrupted by Sir William's shocked questions.
"Some of the morons in Drunk Town, aided
I'm sorry to say by some of our more stupid
traders, decided that every Jappo in the village
was responsible so a couple of hours ago a mob
of them started beating up anyone they could find, that
brought samurai steaming in, troops and Navy
fellows confronted them and now there's a standoff,
both sides armed, reinforced and getting grimmer
by the minute, some of our cavalry there, the
General's in command and bristling to order a charge like
the Light Brigade at Balaclava."
  Bloody fool, Sir William thought.
"I'll go ashore at once."
  Marlowe said, "I'll send a
detachment of marines with you, sir. Orderly!"
  The cabin door opened instantly.
"Yessir?"
  "Marine Captain and ten marines with a
signalman to the main deck gangway on the
double!" then to Jamie, "Where's the riot,
exactly?"
  "The south end of the village, near No
Man's Land."
  "Sir William, I'll be standing off,
close in. Any trouble, use my signalman
and you can order up a barrage."
  "Thank you, but I doubt if I'll need
naval support."
  Jamie said, "Another problem is--"
  "When we're in the cutter." Sir William
was already halfway to the main deck. "We'll
take yours, it's faster. Head for the Drunk
Town wharf."
  In moments the Struan cutter was at full
speed, marines crowded into the stern, Sir
William, Jamie and Tyrer in relative
comfort in the midship cabin. "Now, Jamie,
another problem?"
  "It's Mr. Tyrer's not-so-tame samurai,
Nakama." Jamie glanced at Phillip
briefly. "Part of the mob attacked him but he
broke away, somehow got some swords and fought
back, cut one drunk, an Aussie, but not
badly, and would have killed the rest if they hadn't
fled. Some of them got guns, rushed back and
nearly blew him away so he retreated into a
village store, we think there may be some
samurai with him--and there's a dozen or so
maniacs surrounding the place, ready to lynch
him."
  Sir William gasped, "A lynch mob?
In my jurisdiction?"
  "Yes, sir. I tried to get them to leave him
alone but they told me to piss off. Nakama
wasn't at fault initially, Sir William,
I saw him on High Street, that much I'm
sure of."
  "Good," Sir William said tightly.
"Fortunately we've one law for the rich and the
same for the poor, and the same for anyone under our
protection. If he's lynched we will lynch the
lynchers. I'm tired of Drunk Town and their
rabble nonsense. Until we get our allotment
of Peelers from London we'll form
our own police force. I'm Chief. Jamie,
you're temporary Deputy Police Chief with
Norbert an equal Deputy--equally
temporary."
  "Not on your nelly, Sir Wil--"
  "Then it's Norbert alone," Sir
William said sweetly.
  "God dammit, all right," Jamie said, not
pleased at all, knowing that that job had to be a
thankless task. "Norbert, eh? Did you hear
about Norbert and the tai-pan?"
  "What about them?"
  Jamie told them about the quarrel and
challenge. "The betting's five to one they sneak
off one dawn and one of them will end up very dead."
  Sir William's eyes looked to heaven and
he said wearily, "I'm away three days and
everything's up the creek." He thought a moment.
"Phillip, you'll order both of them into my
office first thing tomorrow." His voice changed and the other
two men winced at the venom therein: "Advise them
both, in advance, that they had both better be
wise, docile and better listen to, and be
guided by my gentle homily. Coxswain! Get
a bloody move on, for God's sake!"
  "Aye aye sorr ..."
  "Did you bring my briefcase, Phillip?"
  "Yessir." Tyrer thanked Heaven he had
remembered.

  Hiraga was peering through the slats of the
barricaded door of the shoya's shop-house at the
shouting, angry men, armed with pistols and
muskets. Sweat ran down his face. He was
choked with rage and not a little afraid though he hid
it from the others. Blood from a slight wound in his
back stained his shirt--he had discarded his frock
coat the moment he had rushed in here to fetch some
swords. The shoya stood nervously beside him,
unarmed except for a fishing harpoon--only
samurai could bear arms, on pain of death.
  Trapped with them was a greying ashigaru, a
foot soldier, who watched Hiraga with awe and
confusion: awe for his fighting ability and because he was
clearly shishi, confusion because he wore gai-jin
clothes and grew his hair like them and seemingly
lived in the Settlement with them, yet was also the
subject of these unwarranted attacks.
  Stinking gai-jin, he thought, as if a futile
attempted burglary by a baka ronin
mattered--of course the man was just a simple
ronin thief and not after the girl, what civilized
man would want one of them? The fool was
correctly killed for his impertinence, no one was
hurt, so why all the violence? Baka
gai-jin! "Is there a way out the back?" he
asked.
  The shoya shook his head, his face ashen. This was
the first time there had been a major disturbance with so
many gai-jin on the rampage. And he was
directly involved: had he not harbored this
shishi? Even the maniac ronin had been in his
house and he had not reported them as he was
obliged to do--not only them but any strangers?
  "There's bound to be a Bakufu
investigation," his wife had moaned an hour
ago, "we are bound to be called before them
to testify. Enforcers are still at the guard houses.
We will lose everything, including our heads,
Namu Amida Butsu!" She and their
eldest daughter had been shopping at the vegetable
market when the first of the mob had rushed through the
village shouting threats, upsetting crates,
barging and jostling shoppers and causing them to run
home in panic.
  "So sorry, Sire," the shoya managed
to say, "we are surrounded--there are more gai-jin in
the back alley."
  Apart from the dozen-odd men outside confronting
them, most of the population of the Settlement was
collected on both sides of No Man's
Land. The majority had begun as onlookers out
for a lark, but now many were well whipped up by a hard
core of rioters wanting revenge. Behind those in the
village street were twenty samurai from the
North Gate guarding the village. In front
were those from the South Gate. None of the samurai
had their swords out but all had their hands on their
hilts, officers to the fore. The same was true with the
troops confronting them, rifles ready, the dozen
cavalry sitting on their horses waiting for
orders, the General nearby--everyone confidently
and noisily spoiling for a fight.
  Once again the senior Japanese officer
shouted above the clamor for the gai-jin to disperse and
once again the General shouted imperiously--to a
following roar of approval--the samurai were
ordered to disperse, neither side understanding the other, or
wanting to understand.
  Hiraga could just hear the General
among the shouts and counter shouts. Fool, he
thought, seething, but he is not as big a fool as
madman Ori. Good that he's dead, very good!
Stupid to do what he did to achieve nothing but
trouble, stupid! I should have killed him the moment
I caught him wearing her cross--or in the
tunnel.
  When her warning screams had broken the night's
quiet, immediately followed by rifle fire, he and
Akimoto had been hunched down in the alley
near Struan's, wearily lying in wait for
Ori, hoping to intercept him--they had not seen
Angelique go to the Legation so presumed him
to be somewhere nearby, perhaps even inside the Struan
Building.
  In the confusion that followed, they had joined the
growing mass of half-dressed men converging on the
Legation, their laborer's clothes and caps
camouflaging them.
  In shock Hiraga and Akimoto saw the two
doctors arrive and then, in a little while,
Ori's body dragged out into the light. At once
Hiraga motioned to Akimoto and they slid
nervously into the night, and the moment they were in their
village hideaway, Hiraga burst out,
"May Ori be reborn gai-jin filth not
samurai! This will stir up a hornet's nest.
Sneak back to the Yoshiwara at once, use the
tunnel and hide until I send word or come
to find you."
  "And you?"'
  "I am one of them," he had said with a twisted
smile. "Taira is my protector, so is
the gai-jin leader, everyone knows so I am
safe." But I was wrong, he thought bitterly,
the mood of the men outside becoming even rougher.
  A couple of hours ago, the moment Pearl was
spotted on the horizon, he had left the
village and walked along High Street heading
for the British Legation with a whole list of phrase
translations Tyrer had asked to be done while
he was away. He was lost in thought, more than a little
anxious to hear firsthand about the Yedo meeting when
furious gai-jin faces jerked him out of his
reverie.
  "It's Tyrer's Jappo ..."
  "Isn't he samurai ..."
  "Hey, monkey, you-ah, you samurai
heya ..."
  "He certainly looks like the other
bugger ..."
  "Jesus, that's a fact ... same hair
style ..."
  "We'll teach you lot to interfere with our women
..."
  Without warning someone shoved him in the back,
knocking him down, sending his top hat rolling
away to be stomped into the mucked roadway to roars
of laughter while others began to kick him,
banging into each other in their haste. This gave him
a second's respite and, using his superior
physique and youth, he had scrambled up and
broke through the cordon with them in ponderous
pursuit.
  Down the alley by Struan's into the village
area, samurai guards running in from both gates
to see what was going on. More men blocked access
to his hideaway where he had hidden his pistol so
he darted into the shop of the shoya, grabbed some
inadequate swords and whirled to the attack. His
berserk charge caught his assailants unawares,
scattering them, three went down, one wounded, and the
others fled out of range. Somewhere down the street
a man fired a musket, the bullet passed
harmlessly, and more men with guns started collecting,
and in the jumbled melee of samurai and gai-jin,
he and the ashigari had somehow retreated with him into the
shop.
  The three men ducked as a bullet came out of
nowhere to shatter an ornate vase. From the back
part of the house a child moaned only to be quickly
hushed.
  Outside the shouting increased. Lunkchurch,
well heated and in his usual afternoon brandy haze,
bellowed, "Let's fire them ... burn the
buggers out ..."
  "Are you off your rocker? All Yokopoko
could catch f--"
  "Burn 'em out, by God! Who's got a
match?"

  When the Struan cutter swung alongside the
Drunk Town wharf, everyone piled out and ran
down its length into the square, marines in front.
Ahead they saw the backs of the samurai
confronting this portion of the mob. At once the
Captain put their plan into operation. On his command
his men formed into a wedge, rifles at the ready, and
charged into the space between the two sides and wheeled,
the point of the wedge threatening the Drunk
Town people who began to give away and split
into two groups, shouting and alarmed. Tyrer had
rushed over to the samurai who was equally alarmed
by the sudden appearance of the disciplined soldiers,
bowed and called out loudly in Japanese,
"Please, Sir Officer, all men to stay here
safe, Please to salute my Master, Lord of
Gai-jin."
  Automatically the nonplussed samurai bowed
back to Tyrer and as he straightened, Sir
William, flushed from his unaccustomed run,
stopped for a moment and faced the samurai. Immediately
Tyrer bowed to him, calling out, "Salute!" The
officer and all his men bowed, Sir William
bowed back and now the samurai were back in
control.
  At once Sir William turned and went
into the wedge that was gaining ground, the people closest to the
marines being shoved back by the rifles.
  "Get out of the way! Get back ... back!"
the young Captain was shouting, his adrenaline pumping.
He was just behind the point of wedge, and when the way
did not clear fast enough for his liking he shouted,
"FIX BAYONETS!"
  As one man the marines stepped back two
paces, fixed bayonets, levelled them at the
crowd, each marine picking a target, each
becoming a graven, waiting cog of a killing
machine that was famed and feared throughout the world.
"PREPARE TO CHARGE!"
  Sir William, Tyrer, and McFay
stopped breathing. Along with everyone else. Immediate
silence. Then the evil spirit that all mobs contain
vanished and the men here became just a rabble that broke
and fled in all directions.
  The Captain did not wait. "Port
rifles, follow me!" He led the way at a
run towards the village where the majority of
traders, soldiers, a dozen cavalry, and
samurai were gathered, all of them still oblivious of
Sir William and his marines.
  Again the wedge formed but as they came up to the
back of the shouting mass, they heard the General
shouting, "For the last time I order you out or I will
throw you out ..." to be drowned under a roar from a
crowd that was clearly ready to explode. The
Captain decided there was no time to waste.
"Halt! One round over their heads, FIRE!"
  The volley blew away the noise and the fury
and got immediate attention, even from the
equally unprepared cavalry. Everyone had
whirled or ducked and in the silence Sir
William, red with rage, stalked into the space
between the two sides. Further down the street
Lunkchurch and the others were transfixed. He
held a second burning rag in his hand, poised
to throw, the first was already on the veranda against the wooden
wall, flames spreading. Seeing Sir
William and the marines, they evaporated into side
streets, rushing pell-mell for home.
  All other eyes were on Sir William.
He settled his top hat more firmly and took a
paper out of his pocket. In a loud grating
voice he began: "I am reading you Her
Majesty's Riot Act: if this unauthorized
assembly does not disperse instantly, every man
woman or child is liable for arrest and ..." His
next few words were lost under general grumbling and
curses but, instantly, the rabble began
to dissolve.
  The Riot Act of 1715 had been
promulgated by Parliament after the Jacobite
Rebellion that only ruthlessness had contained and
obliterated. The new law was designed to stop
any unauthorized dissension at source. It
granted all Magistrates or Justices of the
Peace the right and duty to read the Act out to any
group of more than twelve persons considered a
threat to the peace of the realm, the onus on the
rioters to hear and obey. Anyone who did not
disperse within forty-five minutes was liable to immediate
arrest, incarceration, and, if proven guilty, to either
a sentence of death or to being sentenced
to transportation for life at Her Majesty's
pleasure.
  There was no need for Sir William to finish
reading. The village street emptied but for the
troops and the General, and the samurai.
"Phillip, deal with them, tell them to go home
please." He watched for a moment as Tyrer went
over and bowed and the officer bowed back. He's a
good lad, he thought, then turned away to put a
bleak eye on the General who was flushed and
sweating. "'Morning, Thomas."
  "'Morning sir." The General saluted.
Smartly--but only because of the soldiers around him.
  Sir William did not raise his hat in
reply. Stupid berk, he was thinking.
"Pleasant day, what?" he said easily. "I
suggest you dismiss the men."
  The General motioned to the cavalry officer who
was, secretly, more than a little pleased that Sir
William had arrived when he did, knowing too that
the Japanese were not at fault and he should have been
walking his horses into the rabble of traders. What
a bunch of ill-disciplined scum, he thought.
"Sergeant!" he called out. "All the men back
to barracks and dismiss them. Now!"
  The soldiers began sorting themselves out. Tyrer
bowed a last time to the samurai officer, feeling very
pleased with himself, then watched them amble away up the
street towards their North Gate.
  "Damn good show, Phillip, you did very
well," Jamie McFay said.
  "Oh? Didn't do a thing really," Tyrer
said, pretending diffidence.
  Jamie McFay grunted. He was sweating,
his heart thumping, he had been sure that someone would
pull a trigger or jerk out a sword. "That was
bloody close." He glanced over at Sir
William who was deep in a one-sided conversation
with the General, now even more flushed. "Wee
Willie's giving the bugger hell," he said
softly, smiling. "Stupid clot!"
  "He's ..." Tyrer stopped as their attention
was diverted up the street. Samurai were sprinting
towards a shop on the east side that had caught
fire. "Good God, that's the shoya's house.
..." He was already running, McFay at his
heels.
  Several of the samurai had jumped up onto the
veranda and began beating out the flames while the
others hurried to the big water barrels with their ring
of buckets that were kept at intervals everywhere
against such emergencies. By the time Tyrer and
McFay had reached there the fire was under control.
Half a dozen more buckets and the last of the
flames sizzled and died. The outer shop wall was
gone. Inside they saw the shoya, beside him an
ashigaru, a foot soldier. Both of them stepped
out onto the veranda. The shoya knelt and bowed, the
ashigaru bowed. They muttered thanks.
To McFay's astonishment there was no sign of
Hiraga, the man he and Tyrer knew only as
Nakama. But before either of them could say anything the
officer had begun questioning the shoya and the foot
soldier.
  "How did the fire start?"
  "A foreigner threw a rag against the wall,
Sire."
  "Dog's shit, all of them! You will make a
report and explain the cause of this disturbance.
By tomorrow, shoya."
  "Yes Sire."
  The officer, a pockmarked man of
thirty-odd, peered into the shop. "Where's the
other man?"
  "Sire?"
  "The other man. The Japanese who was
chased in here by the gai-jin?" he said
irritably. "Hurry up!"
  The ashigaru bowed politely, "So sorry,
sir, there was no one else here."
  "I distinctly saw him rush in here--he was
carrying swords." He turned to his men.
"Who saw him?" They stared back at him
uneasily and shook their heads. His face
reddened. "Search the shop at once!" The
search was thorough and produced only the shoya's
family and servants who knelt and bowed and stayed
kneeling. They denied seeing anyone. A moment of
silence then Tyrer and McFay were dumbfounded
to see the officer suddenly lose his temper and begin
raving at them.
  Stoically the ashigaru and all the soldiers
stood at attention, rigid, the villagers on
their knees, heads to the ground, trembling under the
tongue-lashing. Without warning he stepped up to the
ashigaru and belted him backhanded around the face.
The man stayed as impassive as he could under the
flurry of blows and invective. At the
officer's shrieked command the shoya was instantly on
his feet and stood unflinchingly while the frenzied
man beat him as cruelly around the face, the
women and children trying not to wince at every blow, yet
motionless.
  As suddenly as the beatings had begun they
stopped. Both men bowed deeply, their faces now
welted. Again the shoya knelt. Formally the officer
bowed back, all traces of the tirade gone. His
men formed up and he led them towards the North
Gate as though nothing untoward had happened.
Tyrer and McFay stared after them blankly. In
a moment, when it was correct to do so, the shoya
got up, the women and children went into the house, and he
began to supervise the repair to the wall.
Village activity in the street picked up.
  "What the devil was all that about?" McFay
said.
  "I don't know." Tyrer said, both
of them shocked at the brutality and its
impassive acceptance. "I only caught a word
here and a word there--think it was to do with Nakama, I
think they all said he'd never been there."
  "That's impossible--I know he was inside that
hut. I saw him myself." McFay mopped his
brow. "Apart from that, why take all that from that
bastard? He was a lunatic. And look at them
now, acting as though nothing happened. Why?"
  "I don't know--perhaps Nakama can explain."
Tyrer shuddered. "I'll tell you one thing, I'm
damned if I'd like to be in their power. Ever."

  "Hello, Angel, how are you?"
  "Hello, darling, I'm, I'm much better,
thank you." Angelique smiled wanly as
Struan came in and shut the door. She was
propped up by pillows in her bedroom in the
French Legation, the late afternoon sun coming nicely
through the window and the shadow of a guard now permanently
stationed outside.
  In the early hours of this morning when Struan
had rushed--hobbled--to her side, she had resisted
his entreaties to move, enough in command of herself
to remember that she must stay here because tonight Andr`e
Poncin would deliver the medicine that would deliver
her from evil. No, not evil yes from evil, she
had wanted to shout, Andr`e's going to deliver me
from the evil I carry and from the evil I've done.
"Oh mon Dieu, Malcolm, I am
all right and don't want to move!"
  "Please don't cry, my darling,
please."
  "Then leave me be, it's all right,
Malcolm, I'm quite safe, I always was safe and
Doctor Babcott has given me something to stop
this shaking, haven't you, Doctor?"'
  "That's right, Malcolm," Babcott had
said, "and please don't worry,
Angelique's perfectly all right, she'll be
right as rain when she wakes up. It would be better
not to move her. Not to worry."
  "But I bloody do!"
  "Tonight, perhaps she can move bac--"'
  "No," she had whimpered, tears spilling,
"not tonight, perhaps tomorrow."
  Thank God for tears, she thought again as she
watched Malcolm plod over to the bed, knowing that this
Heaven-given weapon against men, thought to be a
weakness, was a mighty shield. His
smile was fine but she noticed the dark rings under his
eyes that seemed strange and an air of weariness.
  "I dropped by earlier but you were dozing and I
didn't want to disturb you."
  "You would never disturb me." His concern and love
was so open and so deep that she had to fight to keep
quiet and not helplessly scream the truth.
"Don't worry, my dear one, everything will be
wonderful soon, I promise."
  He sat in a chair beside the bed, telling her
about the near-riot and how Sir William had
stopped it so quickly. "He's a good man in many
ways," he told her, but he was thinking: not in
others. He and Norbert had been forewarned about
their summons into his presence tomorrow morning. At
once they had met privately: "It's none of
Wee Willie's bloody business,"
Norbert had agreed sourly, "let him
concentrate on Japanners and getting the fleet
back! Listen, the intruder, I hear you
identified him as one of old Canterbury's
murderers, the other Tokaid@o bastard?"'
  "No I didn't, I think he was a
different man though he'd certainly been shot.
Hoag said he was the same one he operated on
at Kanagawa."
  "Why was he at her window, eh?"'
  "I don't know--it's weird. Just a thief
I suppose."
  "It's right weird. A Catholic too.
Weird ..."
  Struan saw that Angelique was waiting for him
to continue and he wondered if he should bring the
subject out into the open, the why of that man, to ask
for her ideas and give her his, but she looked so
tiny and defenseless that he decided to wait for
another time and another day--the sod's dead whoever
he was and that's that. "When I come back after dinner
I'll bring the latest Illustrated London
News, there's a great article about the latest
London fashions ..."
  Angelique listened with half an ear,
avoiding the clock on the mantelpiece that
tick-tocked the minutes delicately. Andr`e
had told her he would return from the Yoshiwara
about nine that evening, that she should have a pot of warm
green tea ready, and something sweet to eat as the
mixture might be foul-tasting. Also some towels,
and it would be best not to take any more of
Babcott's sleeping draft.
  She glanced at the clock. 6:46. It's so
long, the waiting, she thought, her anxiety
increasing. Then the inner voices became alive
again. Don't worry, they whispered, the hours will
quickly pass and then you are free, don't forget you
won, Angelique, you were so brave and so clever,
you did everything perfectly--don't worry about
anything, you lived and he died and it was the only
way you, or any woman, could have lived--soon you
will be free, of him, of it, and all that has gone
before will be no more than a bad dream ...
  I'll be free, thank God thank God.
  The relief surged through her. She smiled at
him. "How handsome you look, Malcolm. Your
evening clothes are perfect."
  Her warmth jerked him out of his gloom, everything
dreadful surrounding him--except her. He
beamed. "Oh, Angel, if it wasn't for you I
think I'd explode." Tonight he had taken much
trouble to select the right silk evening clothes and the
finest doeskin half-boots, pure white silk
ruffled shirt and white cravat with a ruby pin that
his father had given him on his last birthday, his
twentieth, May 21/. Only six more months
and then I am free, he thought, free to do whatever
I like. "You're the only thing that keeps me
sane, Angel," he said and his smile banished
the last of her devils.
  "Thank you, my darling," she said.
"Explode? Why?"
  "It's just business," he said,
matter-of-fact, avoiding the real issues.
"Damned politicians are messing up our
markets in their usual, obsessive pursuit of
personal power, money and advancement, it never
changes no matter what country, creed or
color. Overall the Noble House is in fine
fettle, thank God," he told her, sluffing
over the crisis they were facing in Hawaiian
sugar and Brock's increasing stranglehold over
Struan's markets and borrowing facilities.
  Yesterday an openly hostile letter arrived from the
Victoria Bank, Hong Kong's central
bank and Brock-dominated, a copy of one sent
to Tess Struan, Managing Director,
Struan's, his copy addressed, M. Struan
Esq., Yokohama, For Information Only:

Madam: This is just to remind Struan's it
has ignoble debts, and too much paper
supported by questionable assets and ignoble profits,
the most of which paper becomes due January
31/, and to inform you, Madam, again, that repayment
of all said highly unationoble paper the Bank owns
is required on due date. I have the honour
to be, Madam, your obedient servant.

  Never mind those poxy bastards, he thought with
certitude, I'll find a way to outsmart them and
all the Brocks. Killing Norbert will be a good
beginning. Our managers and staff are excellent,
our fleet's still the best and our captains loyal.
  "Never mind the Brocks and the rumors,
Angel, we can deal with them, we always have. The
American civil war has boosted our profits
enormously. We're helping the South to run
cotton through the Northern blockade for our
Lancashire mills and bringing back all the
powder, shot, guns and cannons that Birmingham
can make, half for the South, half for the North--with
everything else our factories can invent and
provide, machinery, presses, and shoes and
ships and sealing wax. British output is
gigantic, Angelique, more than fifty
percent of the world's industrial goods. Then we've
our tea trade and Bengali opium to China, a
bumper crop this year--I've an idea how
to buy Indian cotton to boost the American
lack--and together with all our usual cargoes ...
England is the richest and most prosperous country
on earth and you're beautiful."
  "Thank you kind sir! Je t'aime--I
really do love you, Malcolm, I know I'm very
difficult but I do and I'll make you a
wonderful wife I promise an--"
  He had heaved himself out of his chair and stopped
her with a kiss--his strong cigar smell and
pomade manly and pleasant. His arms embracing
her were muscular and strong, one hand straying to her
breast and she felt its heavy roughness, his lips
hard with the faintest taste of brandy. Just the
opposite to him.
  Forget him, the voices whispered.
  I can't, not yet.
  Bending over her like this was a dreadful strain on
his wounded back and stomach muscles so he
straightened with an effort though he would have gladly
taken her now--had he her acquiescence--whatever
the pain. "The sooner we're married, the
better," he said, sure that he had
felt her lips and breast and body respond.
  "Oh yes, please yes."
  "Christmas. That's only next month."
  "Do you think ... sit down, my darling, and
rest a moment. Should we discuss ... when should we
return to Hong Kong?"
  "I, I haven't decided." Much of his
bonhomie went at the thought of having to face his
mother.
  "Perhaps we should go back next week an--"
  "Not till I'm fit." And off the
painkiller, he thought, his insides grinding, then
I can deal with her and Brock and the bloody bank.
Just before coming here he had had the second dose of the
day, earlier than usual.
  I'll have a last one before sleeping, then tomorrow
start fresh. Once a day from now on. Couldn't
start today--last night and the problem with Norbert and
... well, yesterday was especially rotten.
"Don't trouble your lovely head."
  "But I worry over you very much. Malcolm,
I'd never want to interfere with anything, but I do
worry about you. And there is something that I feel I
must mention," she said carefully. "The trouble between you
and Jamie. Isn't there anything I--"
  His sudden smile stopped her. "Jamie's
all right now, my darling. That's today's good news.
This evening I sent for him and he apologized for
being difficult. He even renewed his oath
to support me in everything. Everything."
  "Oh, that's wonderful, I'm so pleased."
  Just before coming here Jamie McFay had asked
to see him. "Sorry to interrupt you, but I
wanted to clear the air and try to make a peace and
try, a last time, to dissuade you from the duel:
Norbert will surely try to kill you."
  "Sorry, but it's none of your affair, and
I'll certainly try to kill him. I agree
it's a good idea to clear the air, once and for
all: Jamie, will you obey me as tai-pan or
are you going back on your holy oath?"'
  "Yes, I will obey the tai-pan as I
swore."
  "Good. After we see Sir William tomorrow,
secretly ask Norbert if next Wednesday
suits him--yes, Jamie, I know it's his
birthday. The racecourse, behind the stands, first
light. On your head keep it secret, don't
even tell Dmitri."
  "If you kill him you'll have to leave
Japan quickly."
  "I've thought about that. Our clipper Storming
Cloud will be in the roads. We'll board her and
go to Hong Kong. There I can, well, arrange
matters whatever happens."
  "I hate this whole idea."
  "Yes, but never mind. You remember your oath
and will stick by it?"'
  "Yes."
  "Thank you, Jamie. Let's be friends again
..."
  Through his haze of excitement, he heard
Angelique saying, "Oh how happy that makes
me," and had to make an effort not to burst out with the
news that he had set a date for the duel, when his
own revenge on the House of Brocks, at long
last, would begin. Angel will know soon enough and be
proud of me, he thought confidently. "No need
to worry about Jamie, my darling, or about Hong
Kong. Anything."
  "Malcolm, dear, may I please write
to your Mama?" she asked, knowing that she must begin
to bring the enemy to battle. Andr`e had warned her
that Tess Struan's power within the company was
immense, and influence over Malcolm, his brother
and sisters, equally vast, reminding her that he was a
minor, therefore without her approval the marriage
could not take place for months, and without her
benevolence might never happen. As if I needed
reminding, she thought. "I want to assure her of
my undying affection and my promise to become the
best daughter-in-law in the whole wide world."
  He beamed at the idea. "Excellent!
I'll write one too and we'll send them off
together." He took her hand. "No woman so
stunning as you, should also be so thoughtful and kind. I
know she's going to love you as much as I do."

  Again Hiraga said, "When gai-jin run
away, shoya say me to go quick'ry--he very
'fraid of the samurai, very 'fraid."
  "I can believe that." Tyrer shifted in his
chair, Hiraga opposite him, uncomfortable
too. The sitting room of the small bungalow in
the Legation grounds that Tyrer shared with Dr.
Babcott was sparsely furnished, with a few
chairs, two desks and the smell of ointments and
salves from pots of medicaments on shelves lining
one wall. Windows were open to the night and though it
was not cold Hiraga shivered, still
unsettled by his near capture. The moment the
rioters had rushed away and he could escape the
back way he had told the shoya and ashigari,
"You know what'll happen if I'm caught here!
Better silence, better silence and a quick beating that
will soon be forgotten than a trek to prison which
none of us--or your wife and children--will survive.
Sonno-joi!"
  Tyrer was saying, "But I don't understand why
one moment that officer was sane, the next a
brute, and the next sane again with everyone pretending
nothing had happened."
  Hiraga sighed. "All so simp're,
Taira-san. The captain sure ashigari 'ried
... sure not say truth, and shoya not say
truth, and men not say truth so he beat them
to save face--not say truth to samurai is very
bad, against 'raw, so very bad. Punishment
correct so everyone happy, no more prob'rem."
  "Maybe for them," Tyrer said gloomily, "but
we have lots of problems. Sir William
isn't at all happy, either with the rotter who was
killed--or with you."
  "I no prob'rem, I not attack, men
attack me."
  "Sorry, Nakama, that's not the point. He
says you are an irritant, an unnecessary
complication, sorry, but he's right. The
authorities will soon know you're here, if they
don't already. Then they'll demand that we hand you
over--we can't avoid that and eventually we'll have
to comply."
  "P'rease? Not understand."
  It took Tyrer several attempts with
simpler words to make his meaning clear, then he
added, "Sir William told me to tell you
it's best you sneak off, disappear while you can."
  Hiraga's heart almost stopped. Ever since
he had escaped the trap in the village he had
been frantically trying to devise a way
to negate the inevitable results of the riot, and of
being seen--the samurai officer would surely
realize a shishi was loose in the Settlement.
No solution had occurred except that he must
remain in hiding here. To attempt flight now was
even more dangerous. Samurai vigilance would be
vastly increased, and if they realized he was
Hiraga of the poster ...
  He wanted to scream aloud, his mind disarrayed
by the rushing events and the depths of the
panic and fear he had endured since Ori's
betrayal. Then his ears focused and he heard a
key word in Tyrer's rambling on about "how
sorry he was to lose such a valuable ally in his
search for Japanese knowledge but there seems to be no
way of avoiding it ..."
  His head cleared. "Have idea, Taira-san,"
he said softly. "Bad for me go now, I sure
die. Want he'rp Ing'erish friends, want to be
va'ru'ber a'rry, very va'ru'ber friend. I know
about Satsuma daimyo, know Satsuma
secrets. Shoya give me mandy ... sorry,
give me many informations. I can exp'rain how
make Satsuma obey, perhaps even Bakufu
obey. I want to he'rp. Ask Sir
W'rum: I give informations to keep gai-jin
safe, you keep me safe and give me informations,
fair exchange. Friends, neh?"
  Excitedly Tyrer thought through the offer: Sir
William will surely agree, but only if the
information is truly valuable, and only if it comes
direct from questioning Nakama himself. That means ...
oh God I can't! "I'd have to let Willie in
on the secret that you speak English. No way
to avoid that, and I just can't blurt out that I've
been hiding such vital info, I'd get sacked
for certain. Can't risk that, not when Willie's in
such a foul mood!" Better Nakama leaves
before my head's on the block and he's an
international incident. "Sorry," he said, in
despair. "It's not possible."
  "Ah so sorry, perhaps have way," Hiraga
said, and made a final gambit to give himself time.
"Have message from Fujiko--eeee,
Taira-san, you make great mark on her, now
she thinks you very best friend. Mama-san say, so
sorry but Fujiko yesterday begin woman's
sick, month'ry sick so cannot receive you for one,
two days." He had seen Tyrer's immediate
disappointment, followed by resignation and
anticipation in quick order.
  Weak with relief, he relaxed slightly, at
the same time once again astounded that any man, let
alone an important official like Taira would
allow himself to show his inner feelings so openly
to anyone, let alone to an enemy. These
barbarians are beyond belief.
  "Here," he continued, offering him the fan with the
calligraphy on it he had had prepared. "It
poem, Fujiko writes: "Counting
hours, very sad. Hurry hours when your sun shine
on me, then no sad, stop time."" He watched
Tyrer take the fan reverently, pleased with his
choice of words though disgusted with her inadequate
writing skill. Still, he thought, the effect seems
to be perfect. "About Chief Gai-jin, have
p'ran but first, meeting with Sh@ogun,
Taira-san, the meeting was good yes?"

  A gust of laughter took Akimoto, so
infectious that Hiraga joined in. "Eeee,
Hiraga-san, brilliant to manipulate the
gai-jin like that! Brilliant! Sak`e, bring more
sak`e!"
  They were lolling in their isolated room in the
grounds of the Three Carp, shoji windows closed
against the night insects. Sprigs of autumn
maple in a green vase decorated the alcove.
Oil lamps. Their swords on racks beside them
and when the maid had left and they had refilled their
cups and quaffed them, Akimoto said, "What
happened next?"
  "After little fish Taira swallowed the bait,
we went to bow before the Great Grouper who gorged
on both. I told him that unbeknownst to Taira
I spoke some English that I had learned from
Dutchmen from Deshima ..."
  "And that's no lie," Akimoto said and
replenished their cups. He had gone to the same
school for gifted Choshu samurai at
Shimonoseki but had not been selected for the
language classes, instead he had been ordered
to specialize in the western naval affairs,
taught by a retired Dutch sea captain.
"Baka that I never learned Dutch or
English. What did the gai-jin leader say?"
  "Not too much. Taira pretended to be equally
astonished as we had agreed. It was easy
to divert the man with unimportant information about
Satsuma, about Sanjiro and his fortress at
Kagoshima, some of their history and so on,"
Hiraga said easily although the meeting had not been
easy at all. The questions had been probing and he
had found it difficult to convince the leader his
pretended sincerity was genuine. In his anxiety
to get permission to stay he had told more than he
wished, both about the political situation of the
outside lords of Satsuma and Tosa but also about
his own fief of Choshu, and even about the shishi.
  He felt a new heaving in his
stomach remembering the cold blue, fishlike
eyes staring at him that somehow had squeezed knowledge out of
him, and the final, curt: "I will consider allowing
you to stay a few more days. We will talk again tomorrow.
Meanwhile you will move back into the Legation for
safety."
  "Better I to stay shoya, Sir
W'rum-sama."
  "You will move into the Legation tonight and stay with
Mr. Tyrer, leaving only with his permission or
mine. When you are on the streets you will be most
careful to avoid inflaming any of our people. You will
obey without question or you will be marched to the North
Gate ... at once!"
  Again he had feigned a meekness and most
abject thanks but inside he had seethed at the
man's lack of manners and was still seething, and more
determined than ever to implement Ori's plan
to burn the Settlement--at a time of his own
choosing. All gods, if there are any, curse
all gai-jin.
  "Sak`e?" Akimoto asked, a dribble
sliding down his chin.
  "Yes, thank you." His face twisted with
anger. "Ori! Baka that he's dead before I
could kill him."
  "Yes, but dead, so is Shorin. Nothing but
trouble, both of them, like all Satsumas. The
men," he added hastily, remembering Shorin's
sister, Sumomo, "not the women."
  "Satsumas are trouble, I agree,"
Hiraga said darkly. "As to Sumomo, I
don't know where to send for news of her, where she is
or if she reached home safely--that could take
her weeks, and more weeks for father to send word here.
News would take two, maybe three months."
  "You asked Katsumata to watch for her. He
will have spies out from here to Ky@oto. She can take
care of herself that one. You'll hear soon."
Akimoto scratched his crotch irritably.
To see Hiraga so unsettled was disturbing. "You
know we're almost locked in here. The Bakufu
Enforcer patrols have been reinforced and they wander in
and out at random. All the mama-sans are nervous
and after the riot today, Raiko ... she will not let
us stay much longer."
  "As long as we pay we will stay. And as long
as the tunnel is safe we can escape by sea if
necessary. Curse Ori!"
  "Forget him," Akimoto said
impatiently. "What should we do?"
  "Wait. The gai-jin will provide us with cover
--Taira will see to it."
  "Because of Fujiko? Eeee, he is mad.
What does he see in that drab? I cannot fathom
that. She is nothing but a drab." Akimoto
laughed and ran his fingers through the stubble of his hair.
"Think I will try her one night, just to see if
anything is special--even though she's
polluted."
  "Try her tonight if you want, Taira won't
be using her."
  "Raiko will already have given her other clients--
she's rapacious."
  "Yes, but Fujiko's already paid for."
  "What?"
  "My new arrangement is that Raiko will not
offer Fujiko elsewhere unless she and I agree
first--so I can keep her available for Taira at
a moment's notice, in case I decide.
Try her if you want, she is cheap enough."
  "Good, I need all the cash I have left,
Raiko squeezed a down payment out of me,
rumbling about the extent of my credit."
Akimoto grinned and drained the flask into his
cup. "I want to bribe one of the fishermen
to take me out to the frigate--perhaps I can talk
myself aboard one of the warships, pretending to sell
fish. I must see inside an engine room, one
way or another."
  Hiraga's stomach heaved, thinking about his own
visit. "Perhaps I could get Taira to take me
again, with you this time. I can pretend you are the son of
an important Choshu merchant, a
shipbuilder, anxious to do business with them, but
any business must be kept secret from the
Bakufu."
  Secret? How long will we be secret here?
A tremble went through him. "It's cold tonight," he
said to cover his fear that once again Akimoto
politely feigned not to notice.

  A few metres away in her own quarters
Raiko had finished her makeup and was dressing
for the evening. She decided on the new pink
kimono. A large heron decorated the back,
embroidered with gold filaments. For many months
she had coveted it. Now it was hers, paid forwith part
of the profit garnered from the hugely successful
sale of the pearl earrings. They proved
to be even more valuable than she had estimated.
  Eeee, she thought happily, the kami and gods
that look after mama-sans were looking after me that
day. A major business coup, all profit
except for Furansu-san's part. Money for the
medicine was hardly worth considering though she had
put a substantial debit in her open set of
books. She smiled to herself. The cost was nothing but
the knowledge of which plant and who could harvest it, at what
correct season and how to make the infusion, ah,
that was worth whatever the market would stand.
  "The gai-jin princess will be a marvelous,
long-term asset," she murmured contentedly,
pleased with what she saw in her full-length
mirror. It was the only modern one in the whole
Yoshiwara, a present from a client, imported
especially for her from England. A small frown
creased her forehead as she thought of him:
Kanterberri, the gai-jin who was killed on the
Tokaid@o by those fools Ori and Shorin.
Baka! He was a good client and most
appreciative of my services in finding him the
perfect mistress, Akiko, whose name is now
Fujiko--very convenient for us that our Ing'erish
gai-jin rarely share their women, prefer
to fornicate in secret, with one woman, keeping
her secret in our Floating World that is based
on discretion and secrecy.
  Taira none the wiser, Fujiko a new
life and new lover. Good for everyone.
  "Mistress? The gai-jin Furansu-san
has arrived."
  "Good." Raiko made sure the medicine was
correct and put it beside the table. When she had
kept Andr`e waiting the precise amount of time,
neither too little or too much, she sent for him.
"Ah, Furansu-san, welcome to my humble
House." She poured thimbles of her best sak`e
and toasted him. "You're looking well."
  "Health! Ten thousand summers," Andr`e
replied politely.
  She discussed the weather and the state of business and
then came to the first point. "Your choice of earrings
was more perfect than I thought, your share comes to a
little over double what you asked."
  His eyes widened, "J@esus, so much?"
  "Yes." She poured more sak`e, filled with
glee at her acumen on both their behalfs for, of
course, once a business deal was finally agreed
between them, it was a matter of face that it
was honored exactly. "My bank, the
Gyokoyama, found the client, a Chinese silk
and opium merchant from Shanghai who was visiting
Kanagawa." Another smile. She added
delicately, "He indicated that he would be in the
market for as many such trinkets as I could offer."
  His smile matched hers and he drained his cup
and held it for a refill and toasted her,
"To future trinkets!"
  "Next, the ..."
  "Before next, Raiko. Why he pay so much?"
  "In bad times a wise man puts part of his
wealth into tiny things he can carry in his sleeve.
He's no fool--I considered holding on to them
myself for the same reason."
  His interest quickened. "What bad times in
China?"
  "He said that all China was in revolt, famine
everywhere, gai-jin business in Shanghai less
than usual, though now that the English fleet
laid waste the Mirs coast and sank many of the
White Lotus pirates, the sea-lanes would be
safe for a while and trade up and down the
Yangtze would pick up in the spring. Eeee,
Furansu-san, I hear they sank hundred of
junks and massacred thousands, many villages now
in ashes." Her fear was open. "Their killing power
is terrible."
  She shuddered, knowing that though Japanese
despised Chinese as weaklings, they shared the same
great phobia: fear of gai-jin and an obsession
to keep them forever out of their lands. "Will gai-jin
fleets come against us when they return?"
  "Yes, Raiko, if Bakufu not pay
reparations money. War yes. Not here, not
Yokohama. Yedo."
  She studied her cup for a moment, wondering how
she could further protect herself and turn this
to profit, more than ever convinced that she must, somehow,
quickly rid herself of Hiraga and Akimoto before it
was discovered that she was implicated in the Ori
disaster by harboring him and them, however righteous
sonno-joi was. A wave of apprehension
went through her and she fanned herself, complaining about the
strength of the sak`e. "Karma," she said and shrugged
off what "might be" for what "is." "Now,
some more good news: There is a girl I would like you
to meet."
  Andr`e's heart seemed to skip, and then, when it
started again, it was more weak than before.
"Meet when?"
  "Do you wish to see her before we discuss business
matters, or after?"
  "Before, after, no difference. Will pay what ask,
if like." Again a Gallic shrug and the stark, naked
desperation.
  It touched her not at all. Why should it, she was
thinking. The Yang's hunger for the Yin is the
essence of our world and without it our Floating World
would float no more.
  Strange that the Yang's obsession to join with the
Yin--in and out, battering at the gate, more pain
than pleasure, desperate to end, desperate
to continue, if to end never enough, if not to end moaning
in the night--is all so transient, the Yin never
so grasping. In that women are blessed, though the
gods, if there are gods, have dealt all
mortals a cruel hand.
  Three times I have tried to go onwards, always
because my Yin craved the possessor of a particular
Yang--when a Yang is always more or less the
same--always useless choices that brought nothing but
misery, with no future and twice my passion
unrequited. How foolish! Why? No one
knows.
  Never mind. Now the yearning of the Yin can be
quenched so easily, and for a mama-san, toyed with.
Easy to employ a Yang, or harigata, or
to invite one of the Ladies to your bed. Fujiko,
for example, who seems to enjoy the diversion and
whose kiss can be celestial.
  "Raiko know me, yes?" Andr`e was saying and
she thought, Indeed I do. "I know Raiko,"
Indeed you do not. "We old friends. Old friends
always help old friends." True, true, but you and
I are not old friends--not in its special Asian
sense--and never will be. You are gai-jin.
  "Furansu-san, old friend," she said. "I will
arrange a meeting, you and this Lady," she said.
  He felt weak and tried to hide it. "Yes.
Thank you."
  "It will be soon. Last, the medicine." She
reached down beside the table. The small package was
carefully tied in a square of russet silk as
invitingly presented as an expensive gift.
"Listen carefully." Again her instructions were
explicit. She made him repeat them until
she was sure he understood.
  "Raiko-san. Please, say truth,
medicine dangerous, yes, no?"
  "Eeee, truth? Am I not a serious
person? I am Raiko of the Three Carp. Have
I not already told you? Of course it could be
dangerous and of course not dangerous! This is an
ordinary problem that happens all the time to all
girls and the cure is rarely a problem. Your
princess is young and strong and so it should be easy,
with no problems."
  "Princess?" His features hardened. "You know
who for?"
  "That was easy to guess. How many women are there
in the Settlement, special enough for you to help?
Never worry, old friend. The secret is
secret with me."
  After a pause, he said, "What problem
possible?"
  "Stomach pain and no result, just very sick.
Then we must try a second time, with stronger
medicine. If that does not work then there is another
way."
  "What?"
  "Time enough for that later." Confidently Raiko
patted the silk. "This should be all that is necessary."


                 

  "You understand, Angelique?"
  "Yes, Andr`e," she said, her eyes on the
silk-wrapped package. Her salvation sat on
his desk. They kept their voices down though the
office door was closed against unwanted ears.
  His clock chimed 10:00 P.m.
  He looked back at her uneasily. "The
mama-san told me it would be best if you had your
maid with you."
  "That's not possible, Andr`e, it's not possible
to trust Ah Soh, or anyone--didn't you
tell her that?"
  "Yes, but that's what she said." From across the
corridor they could hear the muted sounds of men
laughing over the dinner table that she had just left--
Seratard, Vervene, Dmitri and a few French
officers--saying she was tired and wanted an early
night. Going to her suite, by prior arrangement,
she had happened to see Andr`e in his office.
"We'd ... we'd best check that everything's
there."
  He made no move to undo the silk. Instead
he toyed nervously with a corner. "If
Ah Soh's not there to help, who ... who will
dispose of ... of the bottles and herbs and ... you
can't leave them around, and who will clean up?"
  For a moment her brain became addled for,
foolishly, she had not considered this problem. "I,
I won't need help, there won't be ... nothing
except the bottles and herbs ... and towels.
I can't trust Ah Soh, obviously I can't
trust her, or anyone, only you. I won't
need help." Her anxiety to begin the treatment and
have done with this forever capped all the worries that
swirled about her. "Don't worry, I'll
bolt my door and ... and tell her that I'll
sleep late and not to disturb me. I, it should all
be over in a few hours, by dawn, yes?"
  "God willing, yes, that's what the mama-san
told me. I still think you should risk Ah Soh."
  "You're not thinking clearly, no, not at all.
You're the only one I can trust. Knock on
my door early, like this." She rapped the table
thrice, then once. "I'll open it only to you."
Impatiently she untied the silk. Inside were
two small, corked bottles and a packet of
herbs. "I drink one bottle at once and then
..."
  "Mon Dieu, no," he said, wearily
interrupted her, his nerves as taut as hers. "You
must do everything in the correct order,
Angelique. First you put the herbs to infuse in
the pot of hot water you've arranged. When that's
done drink one bottle, drink it quickly and
don't worry if it tastes foul, use the
honeyed green tea or a sweet to take away the
taste."
  "I've some Swiss chocolates Monsieur
Erlicher gave me, will those do?"
  "Yes of course." He used a handkerchief
to wipe the sweat off his hands, his imagination taking
him down all kinds of lurid passages. "When
the infusion is tepid, say after half an hour,
sip half of the brew--it won't taste good either.
Then relax and wait, go to sleep."
  "Will there be a reaction, will I feel anything
yet?"
  "No, I already told you, no! The mama-san
said that normally nothing happens until some hours
later--it should be like a, a strong stomach cramp."
The more he talked about it the less he liked being
involved. What if something goes wrong? Mon
Dieu, I hope there's not a
second time, he thought queasily and tried to push
the bad away--and embarrassment--and be clinical.
  "It should just be like a stomach cramp," he said,
sweating even more. "That's the beginning,
Angelique, a cramp. I'll start again:
Drink the first bottle, then sip half the
infusion, half of it, remember you must do everything
in the correct sequence--relax and try to go
to sleep, the more relaxed you are the easier it will
be. When the, the cramps begin gulp the last
bottle, take some honey or sweet, then sip
the last of the infusion--sip it, don't swig it
down. The cramps will increase and then, then it should
begin to ... the mama-san said it would be like a
heavy monthly so ... so be prepared with a ... a
towel." Again he used his handkerchief. "It's
close in here tonight, isn't it?"
  "It's cold and there's no need to be nervous."
She uncorked one of the bottles and smelt the
contents. Her nose wrinkled. "Worse than a
Parisian street toilet in August."
  "You're sure you remember the sequence."
  "Yes, yes. Don't worry, I'll ..."
  A knock on the door startled them. Hastily
she scooped up the two bottles and packet of
herbs and put them in her bag. "Come in,"
Andr`e said.
  Dr. Babcott dwarfed the doorway. "Ah
Angelique, the servant told me you were here.
I just popped in on the off chance of seeing you a
moment. Evening, Andr`e."
  "Evening, Monsieur."
  "Ah, Doctor, I'm really all right," she
said, a sudden twinge of disquiet under his penetrating
gaze. "No need t--"
  "Just wanted to take your temperature, count
your pulse and see if you needed a sedative.
Always best to check." When she began to protest
he added firmly and kindly, "Best to check,
Angelique, always safer to check, won't take
a minute."
  "Come along then." She said good night to Andr`e
and led the way down the corridor to her suite.
Ah Soh was waiting in her boudoir. "Ah
Soh," Babcott said politely in
Cantonese, "please come back when I call
you."
  "Certainly, Honorable Doctor."
Obediently she left.
  "I didn't know you spoke
Chinese, George," Angelique said as he
sat beside her and began to count her pulse rate.
  "That was Cantonese, Chinese don't have one
language, Angelique, but hundreds of
different languages, though only one form of
writing they can all understand. Curious, what?"
  How stupid to tell me what I already know, she
thought impatiently, wanting to scream at him, Do
hurry up! As if I haven't been in Hong
Kong, as if Malcolm and everyone else
hasn't told me a hundred times--as if
I've forgotten you're the cause of all my
misfortune.
  "I picked it up while I was in Hong
Kong," he continued absently, feeling her brow
and the pulse in her wrist, noting that her heart was
racing and there was the slightest sheen of perspiration
on her forehead--nothing to worry about considering her
ordeal. "A few words here and there. Spent a
couple of years at the General Hospital--we
could certainly use such a fine place here." He
kept his fingertips lightly on her pulse.
"Chinese doctors believe there are seven
levels of heartbeats, or pulses. They say
they can sense them probing deeper and deeper. It's
their main diagnostic method."
  "And what do you hear from my seven hearts?" she
asked, impulsively, enjoying the warmth of his
healing hands and, in spite of her hatred, wishing
she could trust him. She had never felt such hands
or the good sensation that seemed to radiate from them
to calm her.
  "I hear nothing but good health," he said,
wondering if there was any truth to the seven pulses
theory. In his years in Asia he had witnessed
remarkable insights and cures by Chinese doctors
--along with an abundance of superstitious
nonsense. The world's strange, but people are more
strange. He looked back at her. His eyes
were grey and very direct and kind. But there were shadows
there and she saw them.
  "Then, then what troubles you?" she asked,
suddenly frightened that he had diagnosed her real
condition.
  He hesitated then reached into his pocket and
brought out a piece of tissue paper. Inside the
tissue was her little gold cross. "This is yours,
I think."
  In violent turmoil she stared at it, her
lips dry and not moving though her head
had conjured up an immediate denial and shrug that were
replaced in the same nauseating instant with: "I,
I certainly ... lost one like it, are you sure
it's mine, where did you find it?"
  "Around the neck of the would-be interloper."
  "His neck? How ... how odd," she heard
herself say, watching herself as though she were another
person, her voice another person's, forcing herself
to be controlled even though she wanted to screech
aloud for she knew she was again in the vise--her
brain frenzied to concoct a plausible reason.
"Around his neck?"
  "Yes, I took it off the body. Thought
nothing of it at the time, except that the man was a
Catholic convert. Quite by chance, I saw the
inscription--it's hardly noticeable." A short
nervous laugh. "My eyesight is better than
Hoag's. "To Angelique from Mama,
1844.""
  Her mouth said, "Poor Mama, she died
birthing my brother just four years later." She
saw her fingers pick up the crucifix and
examine it, squinting in the oil light, unable
to read the tiny writing clearly--cursing the
writing. Then her instinct committed her and she said,
"I lost it, or thought I lost it at, at the
Tokaid@o, perhaps at Kanagawa, the night I
went to see Malcolm, remember?"
  "Oh yes. Bad night, very bad, bad day
too." Babcott got up hesitantly. "I,
er, I thought you should have it."
  "Yes, yes thank you, I'm glad to have it
back. So very glad, but please sit down,
don't go yet," she said, much as she wanted him
to go. "Who was he, that man, and how would he have found
it? And where?"
  "We'll never know, not now." Babcott
watched her. "Did Malcolm tell you we think
he was one of the Tokaid@o murdering devils though
neither he nor Phillip were sure?"
  In spite of her dread as she squirmed in this
new trap, she had an overwhelming impulse
to laugh hysterically and say, He wasn't a
devil, not to me, not the first time, he left me
alive the first time, and not a devil after I changed
him. He didn't kill me though I know he was
going to, I know he was going to just before I made
him leave ... Devil, no but even so he
deserved to die, had to die ...
  Mon Dieu, I still don't even
know his name, I was so enmeshed I forgot to ask ...
I must be going mad to think such things. "Who was
he?"
  "No one knows. Yet. The Satsuma king could
name him now that he's dead but it would probably be
a false. They're such liars--that's not quite true,
it's just that what we call lying seems to be a
way of life with them. Probably the man found the
cross at Kanagawa. You don't remember
exactly when you discovered it had gone?"
  "No, I don't. It was only when I got
back here ..." Again she saw his probing, questioning
eyes and her mind screamed: Did my pulse or
pulses tell him my real condition? "It's
found. Good, thank God. I can't thank you enough but
why should he wear it or keep it, that's what I
can't understand."
  "I agree, very odd."
  The silence grew. "What does Dr. Hoag
think?"
  Babcott looked at her but she could not read
what he was really thinking. "I didn't ask
him," he said, "didn't discuss it with him, or with
Malcolm." His eyes went back to hers and
seemed to take on a deeper color. "Hoag's
a Struan man and he, well his rice bowl is
with Tess Struan. I don't know why, but I
thought I should talk to you first."
  Again a silence. She looked away, not trusting
herself, wishing she could truly trust him, wanting
to trust someone other than Andr`e--his knowing was
bad enough--but sure beyond sure it was impossible.
She had to keep to the plan: she was alone, she must
save herself alone.
  "Perhaps ..." she said, "no, surely he must
have found my crucifix at Kanagawa, must have
seen me there and, and perhaps ...." She stopped then
hurried on, leading him on, inventing as she
continued, "perhaps he kept it to remind him of me
to ... I don't really know, to what?"
  He said awkwardly, "To obviously do you
harm, my dear, to possess you, one way or
another, kill you. Sorry but that must be the truth.
At first I thought, like everyone else, that he was just
one of these outlaws called ronin, but your
crucifix changed all that. The moment I
discovered it was yours ... it must be as you say, he
saw you at the Tokaid@o, he and the other man must
have followed Malcolm and Phillip Tyrer
to Kanagawa to finish them off,
probably to avoid identification. Then he saw
you again, found the crucifix and kept it because it was
yours, pursued you here and tried to break in to,
sorry again, to possess you, whatever the cost.
Don't forget it would be easy for such a man to be
infatuated by such a person as you, to be, to be
obsessed."
  The way he said it made it clearer than ever
he too was within her spell. Good, and good that he's
realized the truth, she thought, faint with relief that
another hazard had been eliminated. Her mind
strayed to the little bottles and to tomorrow when she would be
cleansed, to start her new life, the future
wonderful.
  "Japanese are a curious people," he was
saying. "Different. But different in one major
way, they're not afraid to die. They almost seem
to seek it. You were lucky, so lucky to escape.
Well, I'll be off."
  "Yes, and thank you thank you." She caught his
hand and pressed it to her cheek. "You'll tell
Malcolm and Dr. Hoag? Then that will end it."
  "I'll leave Malcolm to you." For a second
he considered asking her help with his opium
addiction but decided it was not yet urgent, and
anyway it was his own responsibility, not hers.
Poor Angelique, she has enough to deal with. "As
to Hoag, what does it matter to him, or
to busybodies and wagging tongues in Yokohama?
None of their affair, or mine, eh?"
  He saw her clear eyes in the radiant
face smiling up at him, pellucid skin, all
of her emanating youth and health together with the
magnetic, unconscious sensuality perpetually
surrounding her that had, against all medical
expectation, increased in power. Astonishing, he
thought, filled with wonder at her resilience. I
only wish I knew her secret and why some people
thrive on adversities that would break most
others.
  Abruptly the doctor part of him fell
away. I can't blame that ronin, or
Malcolm, or anyone being mad for her, I
want her too. "Curious about your cross," he
said throatily, not a little ashamed. "But then
life's a collection of curiosities, isn't
it. 'night, my dear, sleep well."

  The first cramp clawed her out of a crooked
sleep that was sated with prison hulks
and sloe-eyed, raving demons, the women bloated
with child, the men horned and grasping her away from
Tess Struan who stood guard over Malcolm
like a malevolent ghoul. A second cramp
followed quickly and brought her awake to reality and
what was happening.
  Relief that it had begun obliterated the
previous hours of trepidation for it had seemed
an eternity before she had slept. Now it was just
past 4 A.m. The last time she looked at her
clock it was almost 2:30. Another cramp,
rougher than before, went through her and concentrated her
on the sequence.
  Trembling fingers uncorked the second
bottle. Again she gagged on the putrid taste and
almost brought the liquid up but managed to keep it
down with a spoon of honey, all the while her
stomach churning with revulsion.
  She lay back gasping. Fire seemed
to spread from her stomach. In moments sweat poured
out of her. Then the sweating passed leaving her
limp, soaked and hardly breathing.
  Waiting. As before, nothing. Just a bilious,
sweet sick disquiet that had, after hours of
anxiety, drifted into troubled sleep. Her
dismay crested. "Blessed Mother, let it work, let
it work," she murmured through her tears.
  More waiting. Still nothing. The minutes passed.
  Then, unlike before, a startlingly different
cramp almost doubled her up. Another. Just
bearable. More, still bearable. She remembered the
second half of the infusion and she sat up and
began to sip it. The taste was bad but not as bad as
the liquid in the bottles. "Thank God I
don't have to take more of that," she muttered and
sipped again. Another sip. After each sip a
taste of chocolate ...
  More cramps, stronger now. An increasing
rhythm to them. Don't worry, everything's
happening, she thought, just as Andr`e forecast. Her
stomach muscles were beginning to feel stretched and
angry. More sips and more cramps and then the last
drop was down. Honey jar almost empty--last of the
chocolate but now even its sweetness could not mask
the bilious aftertaste. A draft from under the
boudoir door swayed the flame of the lamp on the
side table, making the wall shadows change and
dance. Stoically she lay back and watched them,
her hands holding her belly against the shafts of
pain, the muscles tightening and
loosening, becoming more tight, knotting under her
fingers.
  "Watch the shadows, think good thoughts," she
whispered. "What do you see?"
  Ships and sails and the roofs of Paris and
brambles and look, there's the guillotine, no, not
the guillotine but a bower covered with climbing
roses, why it's our country cottage near
Versailles where we would go in the spring and summer
growing up, my brother and I, darling Maman
dead so long ago, Father gone only God knows
where, Aunt and Uncle loving us but no
substitute for darlin--
  "Oh Mon Dieu!" she gasped as the first
of the violent spasms slashed her, then cried out
at the next, frantically crammed part of the sheet
into her mouth to stop the shrieks that burst out of her and
would have brought all the Legation pounding on her
bolted door.
  Then the chills began. Ice picks into her
guts. And more violence, twenty times worse than
the worst monthly cramps. Her body heaved
against the strain, limbs twitching in time with the waves
of torment that ripped from her loins and into her head.
"I'm going to die ... I'm going to die," she
moaned, her teeth grinding on the sheet, muffling
the screams that followed with more spasms and chills and
more, on and on and on and then stopping. Quite suddenly.
  At first she thought she had truly died but soon
her senses focused and she saw that the room had
ceased spinning, the flame of the lamp was low but still
burning and she heard the tick of the clock. The
hands of the clock pointed to 5:42.
  She struggled up in the bed, feeling awful. A
glance in her hand mirror frightened her. Ashen
features, hair lank with sweat, lips
discolored by the medicine. She rinsed her mouth with
some of the green tea and spat into the chamber pot and
pushed it back under the bed again. Grimly she fought
out of her soiled nightdress, used a damp
towel to clean her face and neck as best she could,
combed her hair and lay back exhausted but feeling
better for the toil. It was only then that she
noticed the red smear on her nightdress, thrown
carelessly onto the threadbare carpet.
  A quick examination confirmed that blood was
seeping. She arranged a clean towel between her
legs and, in the dawn, lay back once more, almost
sinking into the mattress with fatigue. Warmth
spread through her tired limbs. The flow
increased.

                 

    Sunday, 9th November:
  "Illustrious Chen said to tell you anything that
might affect the tai-pan, Elder Sister,"
Ah Soh began uneasily. "The night before
last Golden Pubics started her monthly and
sh--"
  "Ah, that's why she took to her bed and would not
see my son," Ah Tok said. They were in her
room at the end of the corridor, safe from prying
ears. "He was like a teething child all day, worse
this morning, it's time we went home."
  "Yes. But listen further: she says it's her
monthly but I know her dates like my own. It
seems not possible. Normally she is like any young
civilized virgin, regular, though ..." Ah
Soh toyed nervously with her smock, "though now
that I remember it her last one was sparse, almost
as if she missed it."
  The older woman belched and used a
toothpick. "To miss, or to be little, or
irregular with all the anxiety over my son's
wounds and the vile, murdering barbarians surrounding
us here is ordinary news, not unusual." On the
table between them were various bowls with the remains of her
lunch: sweet sour soup, stir-fried mixed
fresh vegetables, a ginger basted fish with soy,
pork slivers in black bean sauce, garlic
prawns, and rice. "It's ordinary, Younger
Sister."
  "What is un-ordinary is that yesterday morning
when I went to bring her tea, and hot water
to bathe, I had to bang several times to awaken her
and she would not let me into her room, just shrieked
rudely, "Go away!" through the door in that
vulgar voice of hers, and then ..." Ah Soh
dropped her voice dramatically, "... just
minutes later, Big Pointed Nose, that other
sort of foreign devil our foreign devils
call Frogs, he knocked softly like this." She
rapped three times, then a fourth. "She let him
in at once!"
  Ah Tok blinked. "At once? Him? The
Frog? She let him in but not you? You saw him?"
  "Yes, but he did not see me."
  "Ayeeyah! That was clever. Go on, Younger
Sister!" Ah Tok said, now hanging
on every word. "Go on."
  "He stayed a few minutes, then came out
carrying things wrapped in a brown piece of
silk. Like a thief in the darkest night. But he
did not see me spying on him." Ah Soh
paused again, loving--like all Chinese--to be the
purveyor of gossip and secrets. "... Or
even when I followed him."
  "By all gods great and small, you did?" Ah
Tok poured two glasses of the Madeira wine
they savored. "Long life, Younger Sister, may
your Jade Gate never trouble you. Go on, go
on!"
  "He went down to the shore and got into a rowing
boat and rowed out to sea. After a while I saw
him drop whatever it was over the side into the sea."
  "No!"
  "Yes. Then he rowed back. But he didn't
see me, never."
  "What could it have been?"
  Ah Soh leaned closer. "When Missee
let me in I looked around carefully. Her bed
and nightdress were soaked with sweat, and she looked
as though she had had a Happy Valley fever.
Her personal towels were soaked, heavier than
usual. She told me to clean everything, to bring
hot water and not to let anyone in--even the
tai-pan. As soon as I had done what was necessary
she flopped back in bed and went to sleep."
  "That's not strange, but Pointed Nose is!"
Ah Tok nodded sagely. "This is like donkey
dung, shiny on the outside but still all dung.
Clearly he disposed of something for her."
  Ah Soh hesitated. "Your Honored
Son, is there a chance he has lain with her?"
  Ah Tok cackled. "I am sure he has
tried but Golden Pubics will not let his
Celestial Stem relish the breaching of her
Gate, though she flaunts it every chance she gets.
I've heard him moaning her name in his sleep,
poor man. Disgusting, if she was a civilized
person we could arrange the price and that would end
it."
  Ah Soh watched Ah Tok thoughtfully
pluck a piece of the decimated fish head with her
chopsticks, suck the bone clean and spit it
into her bowl. The younger woman would gladly have
partaken of the leftovers, their cook not as good as
Ah Tok's. "How's your cook these days?" she
asked innocently.
  "Improving. The dog comes from my village so
he had promise. I'm training him, of
course." Ah Tok grimaced. "Baffling,
Younger Sister. How is the Empress today?"
  "Irritable as usual. The flow continues,
stronger than normal. Medicine Man Giant
came to see her this morning but she would not see him,
told me to send him away. There's someth--"
  "Has my son seen her yet?"
  "She will see him this afternoon."
  "Good, today his tongue's like an asp to his old
Mother over her. Pointed Nose and Pubics in a
secret plot? Smelly, smelly indeed.
Keep your eyes and ears open, Younger Sister."
  "There's something else." Ah Soh's eyes
rolled with excitement. She reached into her pocket
and put the cork on the table. The lower part was
stained purple to black. "I found this under the bed
when I was reaching for the chamber pot."
  The wrinkled face became even more wrinkled with
puzzlement. "So?"
  "Smell it, Elder Sister."
  Ah Tok obeyed. The odor was pungent,
slightly familiar. "What is it?"
  "I cannot be not sure ... but it smells to me like
Dark of the Moon. I think the bottle this
corked, contained Dark of the Moon ... with other
herbs."
  The older woman gasped. "The expeller?
To cause a miscarriage? Impossible! Why
should she want to do that?"
  "Very bad face for your son to be named a father
before marriage, eh? You know how foreign devils
carry on about marriage and scandals and virginity,
no fornication before the wedding--the man always blamed,
how foolish! Bad face for your son. Then
there's Tai-tai Tess to answer to, as well
as her foul and vengeful foreign devil god."
  Both women shuddered. Ah Tok sniffed the
cork again. "You think Pointed Nose threw the
bottle into the sea?"
  "I'm missing a teapot too, that could have been
for the accompanying herbs, she wanted hot water and
honey too."
  "To take away the taste! Ayeeyah!"
Gravely Ah Tok said, "My son is ...
is quite unbalanced about that woman."
  "What should we do?"
  "You were right to tell me. We will write at
once to Illustrious Chen and send him
the cork in the first mail. He will know if you are
right, and then what to do." Shakily Ah Tok
poured another glass of wine for each of them.
"Keep your eyes wide, be like a clam, I will
do the same--not a word to her, my son, or anyone
until we hear from him what to do."

  Malcolm Struan was hobbling across the High
Street heading for the Struan Building, leaning
heavily on his sticks. The sky was overcast, a
slight wind off the sea, the afternoon chilly and his
crushing worry had dropped away. Seeing
Angelique, convinced that she was all right, more
lovely than ever, though pale and drowsy had done
it. He had stayed only moments not wanting
to tire her.
  A group of mounted traders reined in
politely to allow him to pass, raised their riding
crops in salute. "'Day to you, Tai-pan,"
Lunkchurch said, grim-faced like the others. "Will
you be at the Club at sundown?"
  "What's amiss?" Struan said.
  Lunkchurch jerked his thumb at the squat,
black-hulled, two-masted steamer anchored in the
bay near Marlowe's frigate. She flew the
flag of Brock and Sons. "Her and her news.
Norbert's called a meeting: just traders, not
Sir William."
  "I was going to do the same. Sundown, good,
I'll be there," Malcolm said tightly.
Ocean Witch--all Brock's major
vessels were surnamed "Witch" as Struan's
used "Cloud"--had unexpectedly arrived
late yesterday evening with news, mails and the
latest Hong Kong papers. "Bloody
stupid!"
  Major editorials in all papers were about
Admiral Ketterer and the fleet's highly
successful attack on Chinese pirate nests
in and around Mirs Bay and that now he was en route
to Shanghai for coaling. The Guardian, using
big, angry type, summed up the problem:

In a dispatch to the Governor, Admiral
Ketterer wrote that they had suffered some
casualties caused by Chinese shore batteries
being armed with modern cannon--cannon made in
Birmingham, emanating from Hong Kong, and
acquired through fair means or foul by Wu Sung
Choi, leader of the White Lotus
fleets who, regrettably, was not captured or
killed.
  Astonishingly, because of this minor incident (the
cannon were spiked by a landing party of marines) the
Admiral recommended that all sales of all
arms--and all opium--be declared illegal and
embargoed throughout Asia at once, particularly
to China and Japan, with the stiffest penalties for
any infraction.
  This unwarranted interference with legitimate
trade, this unconscionable imputation of blame
on all China traders--renowned for their
fair-mindedness, their intrepid Empire-building
capabilities, their loyalty to Her Majesty,
God Bless Her, and of putting the Mother Country
before profit--must be protested in the strongest
terms.
  The Editors would like to ask the Admiral:
who provides the taxes to pay for the greatest navy
the world has ever seen (of which he is undoubtedly
an admirable member though clearly misinformed on
vital matters of interest to the Crown) without which
our Empire ceases: Only and always hard working
traders and their trade ...

  "Ketterer's a bloody fool," Struan
said. "Norbert's right in that. Perhaps now Sir
William will see the light and ask for a
replacement at once. We've got to deal with the
Jappos here ourselves and Ketterer won't move
without crossing the t's and dotting the i's."
  "We certainly needs a bugger with balls,"
Lunkchurch said. "Ketterer's a damp fart."
  One of the other men said, "Hey, Charlie, he
smashed the pirates when he'd the order, he'll
do the same here. Wot's an extra few
months, eh? Tai-pan," he asked
anxiously, "can we know how Miss Angel
is?"
  "She's fine, she's fine now."
  "Thank God for that!"
  News that she had taken to her bed had flashed
around the Settlement yesterday and when it was learned
she had refused to see Babcott, Hoag or
even the tai-pan concern escalated: "Christ,
it's the Frog cooking, she's poisoned ...
No, she's caught their plague ... Frogs
don't have plagues for God's sake, just lice.
... We all got lice ... I heard it was
cholera. ..."
  Universal relief permeated Yokohama at
noon today when Minister Seratard had put out an
official bulletin that she was in perfect health,
merely suffering from a temporary indisposition--
quickly whispered it was just her period.
  "My fianc@ee's fine," Malcolm said
again. Proudly.
  "That's a relief," Lunkchurch said. "You
hear Witch's leaving on tonight's tide?"
  Malcolm glanced out to sea, much of his disquiet
returning. Last night when he had first heard of the
ship's arrival he had been filled with a
nauseating, sudden panic that Tyler Brock or
Morgan Brock were aboard. It was only when
Jamie reassured him they were not that he could think
clearly.
  Why the hell does Tyler Brock terrify
me, even now? he asked himself again. I can understand
it when I was small but now Tyler's not much
taller than me, though ugly as ever,
rough-visaged and foulmouthed, with his big belly and
his one eye always bloodshot. What does that
matter? There are many men in Hong Kong like him,
many uglier. Many such enemies. But they don't
frighten me. He's always been our enemy and we've
contained him every time--Dirk did, my father did,
Mother did, has and I must but ... Christ
Almighty I hate that bugger for all the grief
he's caused Mother and the family.
  He took a deep breath and concentrated on
Ocean Witch. "She's not due out for two
days."
  "That's the rumor."
  "But why? Why so fast a turnaround?"
  "Don't know, but that's the poop."
  "We'll soon find out. 'Day!" Malcolm
cast off his foreboding and continued across the road.
Ahead was the Struan Building where he was heading
and beyond that the spire of Holy Trinity. He had
been to the early service this morning and had prayed
for Angelique and for strength and afterwards had felt
better. But God curse all Brocks forever,
let me kill Norbert quickly an--
  "Tai-pan!"
  Startled from his revery he looked up around.
Phillip Tyrer was hurrying from the British
Legation. "Sorry but we all just wanted to know
how Miss Angelique was?"
  "Fine, she's fine," Malcolm said. Now,
behind Tyrer, he saw Sir William
peering at him out of one of the ground floor windows.
He waved a stick and gave an awkward
thumbs-up and saw the Minister wave back. Just
before Sir William retreated into the room he
caught a glimpse of another man beside him.
"Oh, that your tame samurai, Nakama?"
  "Who? Oh yes, yes it was. Is she
really all right?"
  "Everything with her was very good, thank you."
  "Thank God for that, we were all worried
to death!" Phillip Tyrer beamed down at him,
a picture of health, ruddy, strong, taller
than Struan but only because now he walked, and
stood, hunched over. "You're looking much better
yourself."
  "Wish that were true, Phillip." Abruptly
Malcolm's envy prompted him to say sharply,
"I hear Nakama's been giving you all sorts
of information, you and Sir William?"
  Tyrer's smile faded. "Yes, I
suppose he has."
  "The arrangement was that you were to keep Jamie and
me informed. Everything. Eh?"
  "Well, yes, yes it was. But Sir
William ... he's trying to find out the
politics of Japan an--"
  "Politics of a country and business are like a
pair of gloves, Phillip. Perhaps you'd drop
by tomorrow, before tiffin? I'd appreciate knowing
what's new." He forced a smile. "Please
give my best to Sir William, see you tomorrow."
  He limped down the street, angry at himself
for being so caustic, sick to death of walking like this,
then climbed the stairs of the Struan Building
heading for his suite. His back and stomach ached
alarmingly. No more than usual, he thought
irritably, and that's no cause to snap at
Phillip. He was just trying to be pleasant.
Never mind, a little of Ah Tok's elixir and
I'll be fine again. I'll ask Phillip
to dinner an--
  "Tai-pan!"
  "Oh hello, Jamie." Malcolm stopped
halfway up the staircase. "Did you hear
Ocean Witch is leaving early? Perhaps on this
evening's tide?"
  "Ah! I was just going to tell you. Heard the
rumor, tried to get it confirmed by Norbert but
he's busy at the moment--how's Angelique?"
  "Fine," Malcolm said absently,
"We'd better be ready with our mails in case
the Witch sails early."
  "I'll be all set. I'll collect yours
as soon as I hear if it's true." Jamie
frowned, seeing how distracted Malcolm was.
  "Send someone to Angelique, she has mail
too." Her letter to his mother, written and
rewritten until both were satisfied. It's a
good letter, he thought.
  "She was really all right, Tai-pan?"
  "Gorgeous." Malcolm smiled, aches
momentarily forgotten, the Witch forgotten. She
had looked spectacular in bed, fresh though
wan, happy and attentive and so pleased to see
him. "She said by tomorrow evening she'll be fine,
Jamie. Why don't we arrange a grand
dinner, here, eh? Us, and say Dmitri,
Babcott, Marlowe if he's free, and
Pallidar, they're both good sorts though they
fawn on her like puppies."
  "What about Phillip and Sir William?"
  "Phillip yes but not Sir William ...
no, best leave them both out. How about Count
Zergeyev, he's always good for a laugh or two?"
  "If you invite him you should really include all
the Ministers--can't very well leave Sir
William out then."
  "You're right. Make it simple, them another
night."
  "I'll make the arrangements," Jamie said,
glad that they were on friendly terms again. Together they
walked into his suite. All damage from the
fire had been repaired though there was still the slight
smell of smoke. "What about Ketterer?"
  "He has to guard our interests or he's out."
Malcolm sat at his desk, began to stack the
mail he wanted to send. "Mother will have already seen the
Governor and sorted him out."
  "Yes."
  Malcolm looked up sharply, hearing a
strangeness under the voice. After a moment he said,
"Curious how confident we are she'll do that, and
not at all confident I can persuade her
to approve my marriage."
  "Don't quite know how to answer that, Tai-pan,"
McFay said sadly, "if it's a question."
  Malcolm nodded slowly, seeing the strong,
well-used face and strong tough body and wondered
if he would be as strong when he was thirty-nine--
in nineteen years. "You got another
letter from her?"
  "Yes. 'fraid no good news at all from
Ocean Witch."
  "Oh? Sit down, Jamie. What did she
say?"
  "Sorry, but, well she reiterated her order
I assist Dr. Hoag to see you back to Hong
Kong at once, confirming I'm sacked at the
end of the month."
  "You can forget that. You wrote her, as I told
you, that you're under the tai-pan's orders, my
orders, not hers?"
  "Yes."
  "Good, so did I and that's the end of it. Your
letter and mine must have crossed hers." Malcolm
lit a cheroot and noticed his fingers were shaking.
"You've never smoked?"
  "No, tried once and didn't like it."
  "Forget the sacking nonsense. What other bad
news?"
  "I've got all the correspondence and
cuttings for you when you're ready. Business is
rotten all over. We've lost Racing
Cloud--she's too long overdue San
Francisco."
  "Bloody hell!" Racing Cloud was one of
their clipper fleet, twenty-two ships.
Clippers, three-masted queens of the sea, were much
faster on long ocean runs than cumbersome
steamers that had to carry and conserve coal. Her
cargo was tea, silk and spices, all highly
prized goods and now, because of the American war,
astronomically valuable--particularly if
diverted to the South. "Insurance won't cover us,
will it?"
  "'fraid not. Never does, even Lloyd's.
They may even claim an Act of War. It is
a war zone."
  "Ayeeyah! That'll cost a pretty penny.
Damned shame about the crew. Her Captain was
Caradoc, wasn't he?"
  "Yes. They must have run into a hurricane--
several were reported off Hawaii though they're
late this year. Her Second Mate was my
cousin, Duncan McGregor."
  "Oh, sorry about that." Even more depressed,
Struan glanced at his bureau where the elixir
waited. I wonder if the same storms
swallowed Savannah Lady, along with young
Pedrito Vargas and our order for
five thousand rifles, he thought absently. That
reminded him. "Those cannon at Mirs Bay--
they weren't sold through us were they?"
  "Not to my knowledge," Jamie said, the normal
response to such a question. Both were aware of major
arms sales to Chinese traders who always
represented the Manchu government. What
happened on delivery at Canton or
Shanghai was another matter.
  Malcolm was thinking, I'll bet fifty
Mex to a dollar they were from us, one way or
another. He was party to one of Struan's inner
secrets: a tenuous friend-enemy relationship
existed between the Noble House and the seaborne White
Lotus Wu Chois, begun by his grandfather and
continued by his father. What about me? What do I do
about them, he asked himself, suddenly sick to death of
Yokohama and violently anxious to assume
all the mantle and secrets of his grandfather--and
to confront his mother. "In a week or so," he
muttered.
  "Tai-pan?"
  "Nothing. What else, Jamie?"
  Jamie went through a litany about the falling
price of goods they sold and escalating price of
goods they had to buy, of demands for increased danger
wages for their seamen, many of whom were of
English-American heritage and were being forcibly
pressed aboard roving, marauding warships of both
North and South. "I could go on forever,
Tai-pan. Russia and France are spoiling for a
fight, so Europe's a tinderbox. All over
India, Moslems and Hindus are killing,
murdering each other, burning crops. Whole
world's crazy." He hesitated. "More urgent,
the Victoria Bank wrote again about the paper
they carry on us here. The notes are due ..."
  "I know all about that and they can rot. The
Bank's Brock-controlled, they've dropped us
in the sewer financing Brock's takeover of
Hawaiian sugar and they're out to bankrupt us.
They can all rot, by God." Malcolm's
voice had thickened. Pain was shafting from his
belly. "Think I'll finish all this paperwork in
case the Witch sails on the tide. Why should
she turn around so fast?"
  After a moment Jamie shrugged. "Don't know,
but I agree: any news to do with Brock's is
bad news."
                                 
  The Club meeting had quickly gravitated into the
usual shouting, cursing, angry mass of men,
increasingly heated, with plenty of drinking, talking
and no one listening, with a single theme locking them
all together: "God curse all governments, all
bleeding tax collectors, all fat-arsed
Admirals and Generals wot don't know their
poxy place, wot don't do wot they're
supposed to do which is listen to the business community,
do wot we bloody say and Bob's your bloody
Uncle!"
  "Good on yer, Lunkchurch. I proposes
..."
  Whatever the man proposed was drowned in the
uproar as several shouted, "Let's impeach Wee
Willie. ..."
  Exasperated, Norbert Greyforth pushed his
way through the crowd from the corner of the bar where he had
begun the meeting and headed for Malcolm Struan
who sat beside the door, Jamie nearby.
Dmitri called out, "No conclusion,
Norbert?"
  "What do you expect, Dmitri? It's up
to tai-pans as ever was. Come along. Jamie,
would you and ..." Norbert was going to needle
Malcolm by calling him young Struan but he
remembered Sir William's very blunt and sour
threat not to provoke him in public or else.
Even more he could feel Tyler Brock's letter
burning in his pocket. He looked down at
Malcolm and said politely, "Would you two
please join me--a private chat, eh?
Dmitri you too?"
  Malcolm had expected Norbert just to pass
by with a curt nod. "Certainly. Where?
Outside?"
  "In my office, if it pleases you."
  The three men followed him. All on guard.
"Is Ocean Witch leaving on the tide?"
Malcolm asked.
  "Yes."
  Dmitri said, "Why the fast turnaround,
Norbert?"
  "Tyler's orders." Norbert noticed the
sudden shadow cross Struan's face and he
smiled to himself.
  His temporary office was on the ground floor
while repairs were being done to the fire-ravaged
upstairs. The central staircase was blackened,
the roof off in places but covered
temporarily with sail canvas. "Proper
bugger, the fire, but there you are, happens to everyone
sometime. Fortunately as I said, the safes
weren't touched nor the books and warehouse." He
motioned to leather easy chairs. "Make yourself
comfortable."
  On the sideboard were glasses and drinks,
whisky, brandy, gin, vintage wine, with
champagne already on ice. His Chinese Number
One Boy stood waiting to serve them. Their
caution increased. "What's your pleasure?"
  "Champagne," Malcolm said, the others
echoing him. He was feeling fine now, the elixir
as always encouraging him to seem inviolate as well
as deadening the pain. When all glasses were
filled, Norbert jerked his thumb at the servant
who bowed and left them. "Health!" They returned
the toasted mildly. He sat on the edge of the
desk, tall, lean and confident.
  "We're safe from ears here," he said. "First,
we, us'n, we represent the three biggest
companies, we should jointly write a complaint
to Wee Willie, not that it'll do much good, and to the
Admiral--we all agree he's an
impediment. No reason, Dmitri why you shouldn't
have at him too, Cooper-Tillman's got a
lot to lose here as well as us. At the same time
we should mount a campaign, Struan's and us in
Parliament to settle Japan once and for all--
either we smash the Jappos and put them in their
place or we quit."
  "We're not quitting Japan," Malcolm
said and McFay relaxed a little.
  "Nor are we," Norbert said thinly, "that's
only our ploy for those miserable bastards in
Parliament." He picked up a file from the
immaculate desk and selected a single sheet
of paper. "This's a secret dispatch from
London via Ocean Witch from one of our
watchdogs there, dated September 16th."
  "That's damn fast," Jamie said for all of
them.
  "We keep abreast, Jamie. Tyler says
to share part of it with you three. I'll read it:
Yesterday the Prime Minister and Chancellor
of the Exchequer privately agreed in the next
Budget to up the tax on tea by 4 pence the
pound, a penny a pint on beer, shilling on all
brandy and imported wines, doubling the tax on
tobacco ..." They all gasped.
"... doubling the import tax on cotton
..."
  "Goddamn!" Dmitri exploded. "That's
crazy! That and tobacco are the only cash crops
we've got in the South! They do that what happens
to our war and what happens to your goddam
Lancashire mills?"
  "We don't have cotton mills though
Struan's have. There's more: To muzzle certain
powerful factions on both sides of the House
they're going to order all our opium plantations
in Bengal torched and tea pl--"
  "Jesus Christ!" Struan was aghast,
Jamie purple and Dmitri in shock. "Then
how do we trade in China for God's sake?
Opium to silver to ..."
  "Parliament don't give a tinker's fart for
our Heavenly Triangle," Norbert said
grimly, "or Asia, or China, or trade,
only staying in office. They want to replant with
tea." He replaced the paper in the folder and
sat back on the desk, knowing full well the
others would dearly love to know the veracity of the
document, and what else was in it. "The Old
Man said to tell you we've an informant close
to the P.m.'s office, his whispers always been
true in the past, and that's the God's truth. He
says rightly we've got to get this bloody pair
out, fast. Dmitri you've got to pressure them
from your side. Tyler says whatever's necessary
we'll do and asks you to do the same. Agreed?"
  Dmitri said, "Agreed. Jesu, I can't
believe it."
  "I do." Struan raised his glass, wondering
where Tyler Brock's trap was. "May they
burn in Hell."
  Solemnly they drank with him. Norbert
refilled their glasses. His face had hardened
to focus on Struan. "Next: we're all
party to our duel. I don't need seconds and
we agreed Wednesday dawn. Sorry, I'm
on Ocean Witch tonight, sorry, Tyler's
orders--so Wednesday's off. I sugg--"
  "Why put it off, there's light enough now." The
words were out before Malcolm could stop them and he was
pleased that he had reacted so quickly and firmly
though suddenly his brain seemed stretched. The
silence intensified. Jamie had blanched.
  "Not now." Eyes glinting and hiding his
amusement, Norbert turned to Jamie
and Dmitri, the formal seconds. "I suggest
we postpone, gentleman's agreement, till I
get back, about three weeks, eh? Then it'll
be next day, whenever."
  Jamie said, "That's a better idea,
Tai-pan. Yes?"
  After a moment the tightness in Struan's head
seeped away. "Fine," he said, neither pleased
nor disappointed but content that he had thrown down the
gauntlet again. He did not notice Jamie and
Dmitri cover their relief. They finished their
drinks and left.
  When he was quite alone, Norbert took out
Tyler Brock's letter and reread it, his palms
sweaty. The first part dealt with their spy's information.
The letter ended: "Get thy arse aboard Ocean
Witch and leave on first tide, just thee no other
passengers mind. Bring thy inner books, the
Jappo gold-mining contract, and all bullion
in thy control. We's to meet in Shanghai,
secret--that's Witch's first port of call
though manifest says direct Hong Kong--
Morgan, me and thee, fast as possible and
secret, no one to be wiser. When thee returns
to Yokohama, mayhaps thy bed'll be in
godrotting Malcolm Struan's room, ay, with
his doxie's tongue fawning all over thee if
that's thy pleasure--soon she be for sale too.
We's just heard her Dad's fled Bangkok, like
Hong Kong, more fraud and swindles, Frog
officials this time. They be catching him, trying him
and then the guillotine--Frogs bain't like our
lily piss-arsed Peelers. Missus sends
best wishes."

                 

               KY@OTO

    Sunday, 16th November:
  Well after dark, Yoshi and his guard, muffled
and disguised in nondescript clothes as ordinary
soldiers, wearily picked their way through the
deserted streets of the sleeping, ancient
capital where Emperors and the Imperial court
had lived for centuries.
  The city had been constructed in Chinese
fashion with straight streets, the cross streets
at right angles, with the sprawling, Forbidden
Palace and grounds central to it.
Only the roofs could be seen behind its tall walls
--six Gates in the walls. Yoshi avoided it
carefully, wanting to elude Ogama's patrols
and samurai guarding the Gates, and when he
arrived, unheralded, at the Sh@ogunate
barrack complex, he went to his own quarters and
soon sank gratefully into a steaming bath that could
easily hold eight.
  "How many fighters do I have in Ky@oto,
Akeda?" he asked, the aches of his days of forced
march beginning to seep away.
  Grim-faced, the old general lowered himself into the
water beside him, the bath a metre deep. The
bathhouse was within the inner redoubt, all maids
had been dismissed and sentries posted outside.
"Eight hundred and two of which eighty are sick
or recovering from wounds, all sworn to you, all
trustworthy, all mounted. Plus the eighteen you
brought with you," he said in his gravelly voice.
The moment Yoshi had arrived, Akeda had doubled
all guards. He was a tough, hatomoto
retainer whose family had served the Toranaga
clan for generations and now he commanded their Ky@oto
garrison. "Not enough to protect you."
  "I'm safe here." By Legacy law, this was the
only defensible complex in Ky@oto, capable of
billeting five thousand men if need be, all
other daimyos restricted to a maximum of five
hundred men--with no more than ten daimyos in
Ky@oto at any one time, their comings and goings
strictly controlled. Time and weak Councils of
Elders had whittled Sh@ogunate numbers to under
a thousand. "Do you doubt that?"
  "Inside our walls, no. So sorry, I
meant outside."
  "Allies? How many daimyos can I count
on?"
  Akeda shrugged irritably. "It was totally
wrong to put yourself at such risk travelling with so
few guards, even more dangerous to come to Ky@oto.
If I had been warned I could have met you and
escorted you in. If your father were alive he would
have forbidden such dan--"
  "But my father's not alive." Yoshi's lips
set into a hard line. "Allies?"
  "If you raised your own standard in Ky@oto,
Sire, your very own, most daimyos and most
samurai would rush to your side, here and throughout the
land, more than enough to enforce whatever you wanted
to enforce."
  "That could be construed as treason."
  "Ah so sorry but truth is usually
treasonous at your level, Lord--and very
difficult to obtain." The weathered old face
broke into a smile. "The truth: If you raise
the Sh@ogunate banner almost none, the daimyos
here will not combine against Ogama of Choshu, not while
he holds the Gates."
  "How many samurai does Ogama have here?"
  "They say over two thousand, handpicked men,
all well placed in fortified guard houses around
the palace, close to nominal guards on our
Gates." Akeda smiled mirthlessly seeing
Yoshi's eyes narrow. "Oh everyone knows it's
against the law, but no one reminded him and no one
has stood up to him. He's been sneaking them in
in tens and twenties since he threw out that old
fox Sanjiro, Katsumata and his
Satsumas. You know they escaped by boat
to Kagoshima?" He slid deeper into the water.
"Rumor has it Ogama has another two
to three thousand Choshu samurai within ten ri."
  "Eh?"
  "His grip tightens on Ky@oto, every day a
little more, his patrols control the streets, except
for an occasional shishi band who pick a fight with
anyone they fancy does not honor
sonno-joi, particularly us and anyone allied
to the Sh@ogunate. They are fools because we are
equally opposed to gai-jin, their foul Treaties
and want them out."
  "Are shishi here in strength?"
  "Yes. Rumor is they are getting ready for
some mischief. A week ago some of them picked
on an Ogama patrol, openly calling
Ogama a traitor. He was furious and has
been trying to hunt them down ever since. There is
..."
  A knock stopped him. The Captain of the
Guard opened the door. "Excuse me, Lord
Yoshi, an emissary from Lord Ogama is at
gate, requesting an audience with you." Both men
gasped.
  Yoshi said angrily, "How could he know I have
arrived? For the last fifty ri we have been
disguised. I waited outside Ky@oto till
dark, we bypassed the barricades and met no
patrols. There must be a spy here."
  "There are no spies inside here," Akeda
grated. "On my head, Sire.
Outside they are legion, everywhere, for Ogama,
shishi, and others--and you are not easily disguised."
  "Captain," Yoshi said, "say that I'm
asleep and may not be disturbed. Ask him to come
back in the morning when he will be received with due
honor."
  The Captain bowed and began to leave. Akeda
said, "Order the whole garrison on full
alert!"
  When they were alone, Yoshi said, "You think
Ogama would dare attack me here? That would be a
declaration of war."
  "What he dares doesn't concern me,
Sire. Only your safety. Now you are my
responsibility."
  The water heat was into Yoshi's joints now and
he lay back letting the warmth take him for a
moment, glad that Akeda was in command, reassured
by his presence, although not swayed by his opinions.
He had not anticipated being discovered so soon.
Never mind, he thought, my plan is still good.
"Who is Ogama's running dog, his Court
go-between?"
  "Prince Fujitaka, a first cousin of the
Emperor--his wife's brother is the
Imperial Chamberlain."
  The air hissed from Yoshi's mouth and the General
nodded sourly. "Difficult to break that link,
except with a sword."
  "Unthinkable," Yoshi said shortly, and thought,
unless it were possible. Either way very stupid to say
such a thing out loud, even in private. "What
news of Sh@ogun Nobusada and Princess
Yazu?"
  "They're expected in a week an--"
  Yoshi looked over sharply. "They are not
expected for two or three weeks."
  The old man's voice rasped. "Princess
Yazu ordered them to cut back to the Tokaid@o
and take the short route, clearly anxious to see
her brother, to guide her husband to kowtow to him
against all tradition--the sooner to bury the
Shogunate and give it to Ogama."
  "Even here, old friend, you should guard your
tongue."
  "I am too old to worry about that now--now that
your neck is in Ogama's vise."
  Yoshi sent for maids who brought towels and
dried both men and helped them into fresh yokata.
He picked up his swords. "Wake
me at dawn, Akeda. I've much to do."

  Just before dawn in the southern outskirts where the
river curled south towards Osaka and the sea,
twenty-odd ri away, where the lanes and
streets and alleys were haphazard, so different from
the straight-lined rigidity of the city, where the
smell of feces and mud and rotting vegetation was
heavy, Katsumata, the Satsuma shishi leader
and confidante of Lord Sanjiro, awoke
suddenly, slid from under the coverlet and stood in the
darkened room, listening intently, sword ready.
  No sound of danger. Below were the muted noises
of maids and servants lighting the day's fires,
chopping vegetables, preparing the foods of the day.
His room was on the second floor, under the
rafters, in this, the Inn of Whispering Pines. A
dog barked in the distance.
  Something is wrong, he thought.
  He opened the shoji silently. Along the
passageway were other rooms, three occupied
by other shishi, two per room. The last was for the
women of the Inn.
  To one side was a small window overlooking the
forecourt. Below nothing moved. Again his gaze
ranged the area and the gate and the street beyond.
Nothing. Again. Nothing. Then a glint, more felt
than seen. At once he slid doors aside
and hissed the code word. Instantly the six men
leapt to their feet, sleep vanished, and rushed after
him, swords in hand, down the rickety stairs,
through the kitchen area and out the back door. At
once over the fence and into the next garden in a
carefully rehearsed retreat, into the next, over
that fence and into the alleyway, down it, quickly
diverting into a passage between the low hovels. At
the end of this cul-de-sac he turned left and
eased a door open. The alert guard's spear
menaced his throat. "Katsumata-san! What's
wrong?"
  "Someone has betrayed us," Katsumata
panted, and motioned to a Choshu youth, spare like
himself, steel hard but half his age, nineteen.
"Circle, see, then come back. Do not be
observed or get caught!"
  The youth vanished. The others followed
Katsumata across the messy entranceway into the
hovel itself. Within were many rooms, this building
discreetly connected to others on either side, and more
shishi. Twenty, all armed, most
captains of shishi cells, now awake and ready
to fight or retreat--one of them, Sumomo,
Shorin's sister, Hiraga's fianc@ee.
Silently they gathered, waiting for orders.
  When they were escaping the Inn not one of the
servants or maids had acknowledged them or their
headlong departure, continuing their labors as though
nothing had happened. All froze a few
seconds later when an Ogama patrol burst
through the front door, and started to go through the sleeping
rooms, waking guests and girls and the mama-san
while others leapt up the stairs to search the
rooms aloft. Wails of surprise and fright and
protest and squeals from the women now occupying the
four rooms above, that, moments ago, had housed the
shishi--again all part of Katsumata's careful
planning.
  In the ensuing uproar of cries and outrage from the
mama-san, and as much as the enraged Ogama
officer cursed and demanded to know where the ronin
outlaws had gone, bashing a few of the male
servants around the face, it was to no avail.
Everyone trembled and loudly protested innocence:
"Ronin? In my respectable, law-abiding
House? Never!" the mama-san cried.
  But when the patrol had departed and they were all
safe, the mama-san swore, her acolytes
swore, and servants swore, everyone cursing the
spy who had betrayed them.
  "Katsumata-san, who was it?" Takeda
asked, a heavy-set, almost neckless Choshu youth
of twenty--a kinsman of Hiraga--his heart
still racing from their narrow escape.
  Katsumata shrugged. "Karma if we find
him, karma if we do not. It only proves what
I hammer into you: be prepared for betrayal,
instant flight, instant fight, trust no man
or woman except a blooded shishi and
sonno-joi." Everyone in the crowded little room
nodded.
  "What about Lord Yoshi? When do we go for
him?"
  "When he's outside the walls." News of
Yoshi's sudden arrival had come in the night,
too late to intercept him.
  "But, Sensei, we've adherents inside,"
Takeda said. "Surely that would be the place
to surprise him, when he feels safe and his
guard is down."
  "Yoshi's guard is never down.
Never forget it. As to our people with him and inside his
walls, they are ordered to remain calm and hidden,
their presence and information is too valuable to risk.
In the unlikely event that Sh@ogun Nobusada
escapes our ambush, then they will be even more
necessary."
  Many grim smiles and hands tightening on
weapons. The ambush was planned for dusk, in
five days at Otsu, the last way station before
Ky@oto. Only a few Inns on both the
North Road and the Tokaid@o coast road were
considered fitting resting places for such august
persons with their multitudinous guards, maids and
servants, so their night stops were easy to know. And
to set spies in place.
  Ten shishi had been assigned the suicide
mission and were already at Otsu, preparing. Every one
of the hundred and seven shishi now gathered in various
safe houses throughout Ky@oto had begged to be on
the attack team. At Katsumata's suggestion
they had drawn lots. Three Choshu, three
Satsumas and four Tosas gained the honor and
were already around their target, the Inn of Many
Flowers.
  "Eeee," the girl, Sumomo, whispered
excitedly, "only five days, then
sonno-joi will be a fact. The Bakufu will
never recover from that blow."
  "Never!" Katsumata smiled at her, liking
her, the best of all his women students--as
Hiraga was best amongst the men, except for his
Ori--admiring her bravery and strength and
skills. She too had volunteered but he had
forbidden it, considering her far too valuable a
weapon to cast away on such a high-risk
endeavor. He was glad that he had told her
to wait here, overruling Hiraga's order to her
to return to his father's home. She had brought the
latest intelligence from Yedo: confirming rumors
of the negotiated d@etente between Bakufu and
gai-jin, the failed attack on Chief Minister
Anjo but the successful killing of Utani and
firing his mansion. And importantly, confirming the
growing rift between Anjo and Toranaga Yoshi.
"Where this information came from," she had whispered
to him, "I do not know but the mama-san said it was from
the source you would know about."
  Also she reported the facts of the manner of
Shorin's death. But knew nothing further of Ori
or Hiraga, other than that Ori's
wound was healing and both were hiding out in the
Yokohama Settlement, with Akimoto--
Hiraga, somehow, miraculously a confidant
of a gai-jin official.
  "You are right, Sumomo, the Bakufu will never
recover," Katsumata said. "And our next
hammer blow will end the Toranaga Sh@ogunate
forever."
  Immediately following the successful elimination of
Sh@ogun Nobusada--at all costs leaving
Princess Yazu unharmed--shishi would launch a
mass attack on Ogama's headquarters
to assassinate him, simultaneously
Katsumata and others would seize the Gates,
raising the banner of sonno-joi, declaring power
had returned to the Emperor, at which time all
true daimyos and samurai would flock to make
obeisance.
  "Sonno-joi," she murmured, exultant
like all of them.
  Except Takeda, one of the Choshu shishi.
Uneasily he shifted in his place. "I'm not
sure about killing Ogama. He is a good
daimyo, a good leader--he stopped Sanjiro
seizing power, stopped the Tosa seizing power, he
is the only daimyo enforcing the Emperor's
orders to expel gai-jin. Isn't he closing the
Shimonoseki Straits? Only our cannon
oppose the gai-jin ships--only Choshu forces
are in the front line, eh?"
  "That's true, Takeda," a Satsuma shishi
of renown said. "But what did Sensei
Katsumata remind us? That Ogama has
changed now he has sole control. If he
honored the Emperor, now that he controls the
Gates, simple for him to declare sonno-joi and
return all power to the Emperor. That is what
we will do when we have the Gates."
  "Yes but ..."
  "Simple for him, Takeda. But what has he
done? Only used his power to twist the Court
to his whims. He wants to be Sh@ogun.
Nothing less."
  There were murmurs of agreement and then Sumomo
said, "Please excuse me, Takeda, but
Ogama is a major threat. You all know I
am Satsuma, so is Sensei Katsumata,
we agree Sanjiro also has done some good, but
nothing for sonno-joi. So he must relinquish
power, gladly or unhappily, and will
go ... will go. The same for Ogama. Yes he
has done some good, but now he does bad. The
truth is no daimyo who has the Gates and is
so close to being Sh@ogun will ever go willingly."
  Takeda said, "Perhaps if we petitioned
Ogama?"
  She said, "Please excuse me but a petition
will be of no value. When we possess the
Gates, to prevent civil war and the possibility
of any daimyo being tempted ever again, when we
possess the Gates we must go further, we must
request the Emperor to abolish the Sh@ogunate,
Bakufu and all daimyos."
  Amid sounds of surprise at such a
radical proposal, Takeda burst out, "That's
mad. Without a Sh@ogunate and daimyos who will
rule? There'll be chaos! Who pays our
stipends? Daimyos! The daimyos own all
rice koku an--"
  Katsumata said, "Let her finish,
Takeda, then you can have your say."
  "So sorry, Takeda, but this is
Hiraga-san's idea, not mine. Hiraga said
that, in future, daimyos will be figureheads
only, the good ones, that power will be exercised through
councils of samurai, of all ranks, equally,
who will decide everything, from stipends, to which daimyo
is worthy and who will succeed him."
  "It will never work. It's a bad idea,"
Takeda said.
  Many disagreed with him, the majority for her, but
Takeda was unconvinced. Then she said,
"Sensei, is it a bad idea?"
  "It is a good idea, if all daimyos
agreed," Katsumata said, well pleased that his
teachings were bearing such fruit, that correctly they
were arriving at the future by consensus. Like the others
he was squatting on his heels, saying little, his
mind on his close escape, inwardly seething at
the new attempt on his life and narrow escape.
  Too near this time, he thought, bile again in
mouth. The net is closing. Who is the
traitor? The traitor has to be in this room.
No other shishi units knew I was spending the
night at the Whispering Pines. The traitor
has to be here. Who is he--or even she? Who?
"Continue, Sumomo."
  "I just wanted to add ... Takeda-san, you
are Choshu, so is Hiraga-san, others from
Tosa, the Sensei and others and me
Satsumas, others from other fiefs, but first we
are shishi with duties above family, above clan.
In the New Order this will be the law--the First law
for all Nippon."
  "Well, if that's going to be the law ..."
One of them scratched his head. "Sensei, when the
Son of Heaven has power again what will we really
do? Us? All of us?"
  Katsumata glanced at Takeda. "What do
you think?"
  Takeda said simply, "I will not be alive, it
matters not at all. Sonno-joi is
sufficient and that I tried."
  "Some of us must survive," Katsumata said,
"to be part of the new leadership. More important for
now: Toranaga Yoshi. How to eliminate
him?"
  "Whenever he comes out of his sanctuary we must be
ready," someone said.
  "Of course," Takeda said irritably, "but
he will be surrounded by guards and I doubt if we
can get near him. The Sensei said not to activate
our men inside. It has to be outside but that will be
very difficult."
  "Half a dozen of us with bows from rooftops?"
  "A pity we have no cannon," another said.
  They sat there in the growing light, each within in his
own mind, Yoshi a prize. But five days were
foremost, then the attack on Ogama--the only
way to take the Gates.
  Sumomo said, "It could be easier for a woman
to infiltrate the Toranaga bastion, neh?
Once inside ..." She smiled.

  Now clouds covered the sky. The afternoon was
gloomy. Even so, the wide streets outside the
walls of the Sh@ogunate barracks were crowded with
townspeople, buying and selling in the market
opposite the main entrance, along with
orange-clad Buddhist priests, their inevitable
begging bowls outstretched, samurai strutting
along, singly or in groups. Ogama patrols
were prominent, each with the insignia of their fief
embroidered on their clothes. Katsumata,
Sumomo and half a dozen shishi strolled
amongst the crowds, disguised and wearing large
conical hats. Housewives, maids, servants
and street sweepers and night soil
collectors, porters and hawkers,
moneylenders, letter writers and
fortunetellers, palanquins and ponies for
samurai and highborn and never a wheeled
vehicle.
  All who passed the Sh@ogunate gates,
open now but heavily guarded, bowed politely according
to rank and hurried on. News that the Guardian
of the Heir had arrived unbelievably without
pomp had flashed through the city--and this, coupled with the
never-in-historical-memory, imminent arrival
of the awesome Sh@ogun himself, arbiter of the Land, his
personage shrouded with almost as much mystery as the
Son of Heaven, and who, rumor had it, was even
married to one of the Deity's sisters, was almost too
much to bear.
  At once samurai worriedly began checking
the readiness of their weapons and armor, daimyos and
their most trusted counselors trembled at the
news, assessing their own positions and what to do and
how to avoid taking any decisive action when the
inevitable happened: Lord Yoshi clashed with Lord
Ogama.
  Activity on the street outside the
Sh@ogunate barracks ceased as a heavily armed
cortege began to come out of the gates, Yoshi's
banners to the fore, soldiers surrounding a closed
palanquin, with more soldiers bringing up the rear.
At once everyone within seeing distance put their
heads to the earth, all samurai stood still, then
bowed deeply until the cortege had passed.
Only when Yoshi and his men had vanished did a
semblance of normality return. Except that
Katsumata and the others were cautiously following.
  Half a mile away a similar armored
cortege began snaking out of the main Choshu
barracks, Ogama's banners to the fore, to even
greater obeisances. Inside the palanquin was
Ogama. For days he had been forewarned of his
enemy's arrival, just as he had been monitoring
the progress of Sh@ogun Nobusada. His
advisors had recommended waylaying Yoshi and
destroying him outside Ky@oto but he had
refused. "Better he becomes my pawn.
Once he's here, where can he hide, where can he
run?"'
  Details for the urgent meeting he had
requested had been settled between their advisors.
It was to take place in the courtyard of an
empty, neutral barracks, equidistant between
their headquarters. Each side to have a hundred
guards. Only twenty would be mounted.
Ogama and Yoshi would ride in protected,
armored palanquins. One counselor each. They
would arrive simultaneously.
  Within moments spies were hurrying the news to the
palace, to shishi groups, and to daimyos that the
two most dangerous men in Nippon were,
astonishingly, on the streets in armed columns
at the same instant. Quickly a spy found
Katsumata and whispered the where of the meeting, and
by the time Ogama and Yoshi's samurai marched through
the neutral gates, Katsumata and thirty men
were stationed nearby--in case an opening for a
suicide attack presented itself.
  The courtyard was a hundred metres square with
light wooden walls, easy to breach, the
one-story barracks and extensive stables also of
wood, dark with age. Opposing guards took up
their positions, while others brought four folding
chairs and placed them carefully in the center of the
space.
  The two men got out of their palanquins together and
strode to the chairs and sat down. Then General
Akeda and Basuhiro, Ogama's chief
counselor, sat beside them. Basuhiro was in his
forties, a narrow-eyed, scholarly samurai, his
family hereditary heads of the Choshu
bureaucracy for generations. Formally they bowed. Then
the eyes of the two leaders locked.
  Yoshi was two years younger than Ogama--
twenty-six--and tall where Ogama was short and
thickset, his face clean-shaven in contrast
to Ogama's heavy blue-black beard. His
blood line was more regal though Ogama's was
equally ancient, equally renowned, both of them
balanced in ruthlessness, ambition, and
secretiveness.
  Leisurely they went through the obligatory
compliments and polite questions, fencing, waiting to begin
--hands easily on their sword hilts. "Your
arrival is a pleasant surprise, Lord
Yoshi."
  "I had to come myself to make sure the wild
rumors I heard were not true."
  "Rumors?"
  "Amongst them that Choshu forces inhibit
Sh@ogunate representatives, legal
representatives from their positions around the
Gates."
  "A necessary measure to protect the Deity."
  "Not necessary and against the law."
  Ogama laughed. "The Deity prefers my
protection to the traitorous Council of Elders
who signed gai-jin Treaties against his wishes and
continue to treat with them against his wishes instead of
expelling them as he has asked." He motioned
to Basuhiro. "Please show Lord Yoshi."
  The scroll, signed by the Emperor,
"requested the Lord of Choshu to assume command of the
Gates until the distressing matter of the gai-jin
was settled."
  "It is not within the Deity's sphere to dictate
matters temporal. That is the law--I must
ask you to retire."
  "Law? You refer to Toranaga law,
Sh@ogunate law, all of which the first of your line
implanted by force which disavowed the ancient,
Heaven-granted rights of the Emperor to rule."
  Yoshi's lips set into a thin hard line.
"Heaven granted the Emperor rights to intercede between
us mortals and the gods, everything in all matters
spiritual. Matters temporal were always in the
sphere of mortals, of Sh@oguns. The
Emperor granted Sh@ogun Toranaga and his
line perpetual rights to deal with all matters
temporal."
  "I repeat that Emperor was forced to agree
an--"
  "And I repeat this is the law of the land that has
kept the land at peace for two and a half
centuries."
  "It is no longer valid." Ogama waved the
paper. "What a previous Emperor was forced
to concede, this Emperor has freely cancelled."
  Yoshi's voice became softer, more deadly.
"A temporary mistake. Clearly the Son of
Heaven has been given misguided advice
by self-seeking malcontents as he will soon
realize."
  "You accuse me?" The grip of all four men
tightened on their hilts.
  "I merely point out, Lord Ogama, your
piece of paper was obtained by false information, and
is not according to the law. The Presence is and always
has been surrounded by ambitious men--and women.
That is why He granted perpetual rights
to Sh@ogun Toranaga and the following
Sh@ogunate to guide him in all matters
an--"
  A bellow of laughter cut him off and set
everyone within the walls even more on edge.
"Guide? Guide did you say? The Deity's
to be guided by Anjo Nori, Toyama,
Adachi and now that slobbering half-wit
Zukumura? By incompetent fools who
overrule you at their leisure, make stupid
agreements with vile gai-jin against all daimyo
advice that lay the Land of the Gods and all of us
open to destruction?" His face twisted with anger,
"Or is he to await guidance from the child
Nobusada to pull our nuts from the fire?"
  "You and I, we need not wait,
Ogama-dono," Yoshi said smoothly, knowing that
his major strength was in his calm. "Let us
discuss this in private--the two of us."
  Ogama stared at him. A slight breeze
picked up and rustled the banners. "When?"
  "Now."
  Thrown off balance a moment, Ogama
hesitated. He glanced at Basuhiro. The
small man smiled with the front of his face. "I
would have thought that important matters should be
discussed openly, Sire, not that my poor
advice would be of value. Private agreements
can sometimes be misinterpreted, by either side--that was
your honored father's rule."
  Ogama's eyes went back to Yoshi. "This
Sh@ogun visit to the Emperor, to kowtow, to
"ask advice," the first time in the whole
Toranaga period, this negates the very kernel of
your Toranaga structure, eh? Worse it
clouds any future settlement between the Son of
Heaven and ... future leaders, forof course
mortals will rule, eh?"
  "In private, Ogama-dono."
  Ogama hesitated, dark eyes recessed in
the weathered face. In spite of himself, in spite
of knowing that this man was potentially the only one in the
Land who could perhaps gather enough opposition to prevent
him reaching the prize he sought, he enjoyed the
clash, enjoyed meeting face to face. He waved
his hand dismissing Basuhiro, who obeyed at
once though clearly disapprovingly. Akeda bowed
and also moved away, even more watchful for the
expected treachery he had warned against.
  "So ka?"
  Yoshi bent forward slightly and kept his
voice low, his lips hardly moving in case
Basuhiro who had placed himself out of earshot,
could lip-read. "The Council vote was four to one
against me in favor of the Sh@ogun
visit. Of course the visit is a major
mistake, Anjo cannot and will not see that. The
present Council will vote as he wishes, on
any subject. Nobusada is a puppet
until he is eighteen, in two years, when
formally he can create many changes and problems if
he so wishes. Does that answer all your questions?"
  Ogama frowned, astonished that his opponent would
be so open. "You said, "in private,"
Yoshi-dono, what do you want to say in
private that of course I will tell my
advisors afterwards and you will tell yours."
  "Some secrets are better kept between leaders,
than ..." Yoshi added deliberately, "than with
certain retainers."
  "Eh? What does that mean?"
  "You have spies--retainers--within my gates,
neh? How else did you know I arrived when I
did? Surely you don't think I don't have men
here, and spies within your walls?"
  Ogama's face became grimmer. "What
secrets?"
  "Secrets we should keep. For example
Anjo is very sick and will die within a year--or
at the very least will have to resign." Yoshi had seen
the flicker of immediate interest that Ogama could not
totally contain. "If you want proof I could
tell you how your spies can confirm it."
  "Good, thank you," Ogama said, docketing that
for immediate action without waiting for guidance. "I would
like the means to prove such pleasant news. So?"
  Yoshi pitched his voice lower. "Within this year
--if we were allied--it will be easy to ensure you
are appointed an Elder. Then jointly we would
approve the other three."
  "I doubt if we could ever agree,
Yoshi-dono," Ogama said with a twisted smile,
"neither on a Council, or which of us would be
tair@o, the Leader."
  "Ah, but I will vote for you."
  "Why would you be so stupid?" Ogama said
blankly. "You must know I would at once
demolish your Sh@ogunate."
  "As it exists, yes. I agree we should. I
would like to do it now. If I had power I would do it
now and make reforms together with the advice of a
council of all daimyos, including Outside
Lords." He saw Ogama's astonishment
increase and knew he was gaining. "But I can't,
I must wait until Anjo resigns
or dies."
  "Why not sooner than later, eh? If he's
the boil on your balls, lance it! You are both in
Yedo Castle, eh?"
  "That would precipitate the civil war I do not
want, no daimyo wants. I agree the
Sh@ogunate and Bakufu must be reorganized
radically--your views and mine are very similar.
Without your support I could not achieve reform."
Yoshi shrugged. "It is difficult to believe but
it is an offer."
  The other man said, "With Anjo out of the way you
could do whatever you wanted. You could tempt
Sanjiro and the fool of Tosa, perhaps both together,
eh? If you three allied against me, perhaps I am
a dead man and my fief ended. Then you divide
them and you are the power." His lips curled into the
smile that was not a smile. "Or more likely they
stay together and divide you."
  "Much more likely. So why not choose power to us
and not them. First, together we crush Tosa."
  Again the short hard laugh. "Not easily, not with
Sanjiro and his Satsuma legions ready to go
to Tosa's aid at once--he could never allow us
to smash Tosa because then he is isolated and we
would turn on him. He would never allow me
to smash Tosa which I could do in time, let alone
allow an alliance between us. Not possible to split
them although they hate each other. At length we would
beat them but neither of us can easily sustain a
lengthy war--and certainly never while the gai-jin
are on our shores and ready to exploit us."
  "Leave the gai-jin for the moment, except to say
that I oppose the Treaties, want all
gai-jin expelled, want--with all my strength--
to fulfill the Emperor's request, want the
Elders replaced and most of the Bakufu
dismissed."
  Again Ogama stared at him, hardly able
to believe his ears. "Such private thoughts,
lethal thoughts, so openly spoken will not remain
secret for long. If true."
  "They are true. They are spoken
privately, between us. I gamble with you, yes. But
there is purpose: Nippon. I propose a
secret alliance: together we could control all
power. You are a good leader, you possess the
Shimonoseki Straits, your cannon cannot stop
the gai-jin ships until we can buy or build
an equal fleet and modernize our
armies--gai-jin ships, cannon and firearms
are all we need. And you are strong enough and clever enough
to understand the problems confronting us."
  "They are?"
  "Five main ones: a weak, stupid and
out-of-date Sh@ogunate supported by an even more
stupid Bakufu; second, the nation is
divided; third, the gai-jin and the need for us
to modernize before their ships, cannons and rifles
enslave us like they enslaved China; fourth, how
to obliterate all shishi whose influence grows in
spite of the smallness of their numbers. And then
fifth: the Princess Yazu."
  "Four I agree. But why is she a
problem?"
  "Nobusada is a child, querulous and simple,
yes and I think he will remain one. On the other
hand, she is strong, educated, and cunning, cunning
beyond her years."
  "But a woman," Ogama cut in
irritably, "with no army, no purse, and once
she becomes a mother all her energies will be
expended on her sons. You see fire in a bowl
of water."
  "But say her husband is impotent."
  "What?"
  "That is what his doctors whisper to me. Say
also he is totally within her spell--believe me
this girl has all the wits and devilment of a
wolf kami! This visit is her idea, the
beginning of her plan: to put him and through him the
Sh@ogunate into the clutches of Court
sycophants who have no temporal experience,
who will misguide the Deity and wreck us all."
  "She could never do it," Ogama said sourly,
"however clever, no daimyo would accept such
madness."
  "Step one: the visit, step two: the
Sh@ogun takes up permanent residence in the
palace. From then on, supported by the
Emperor's requests, her brother's requests,
decisions come down through her cronies, one of whom
is your Prince Fujitaka."
  "I do not believe that!"
  "Certainly he will not admit it. I can give
you proof in a little while that he is not really working
for you but against you." Yoshi kept his voice down and
filled with sincerity. "Once Nobusada is
permanently inside the walls, she rules. That
is why she is a problem."
  Ogama sighed and sat back, again weighing what
his adversary had been saying, much of which was true,
wondering how far he could trust him. Certainly a
secret alliance had possibilities, if the
price extracted was high enough.
  "The answer to her is to break the marriage,"
he said thinly. "The Emperor was asked
to approve it, eh? Perhaps the Emperor would be
happy to request the annulment. At once you
neutralize her, gain back support from the many
who detest the Toranaga connection as a gross
impertinence ... not my opinion," he added
hastily seeing a momentary flush, not wanting an
open clash yet, so much yet to hear and to decide.
  After a moment, Yoshi nodded. "A good idea,
Ogama-dono. It had not occurred to me."
Indeed it had not. The more he thought about it, the more
titillating the offshoots became. "That should have
priority. Excellent."
  Across the square a horse neighed restlessly and
skittered. Both men watched while the soldier
holding the bridle gentled her, Ogama wondering
in his most secret heart if, when he had
eliminated Yoshi--and then, without a hiccup,
Nobusada, the rest of the Toranagas and their
allies--and became Sh@ogun, if he should then
inherit this Imperial Princess. No woman
would ever give me a problem, she would be spawning
sons so quickly even gods would smile.
  "So what is your proposal?" he asked, his
head reeling with the wonderful avenues a temporary
alliance might open.
  "We make a secret agreement from today to join
forces and influence and formulate plans: first
to smash the shishi, second to neutralize Anjo
and Sanjiro of Satsuma, third a surprise
attack on Tosa being a priority. The moment
Anjo is dead or resigns, I will propose
you as Elder in his place and guarantee your
appointment. Simultaneously Zukumura will
resign and a replacement, agreed in advance
by both of us, put in his place. Three to two.
Toyama I keep, Adachi is replaced by your
appointee. I vote for you to be the Council
Leader."
  "With the rank of tair@o."
  "To be Chief Minister of the Council, that is
enough."
  "Perhaps not. In return for what?"
  "From today Tosa and Satsuma are
considered enemy. You will commit all necessary force for a
joint, surprise attack on Tosa the moment
it is feasible. We divide his fief."
  "As he is an Outside Lord, his lands should go
to an Outside Lord."
  "Perhaps, perhaps not," Yoshi said easily. "You
agree never to ally yourself with Tosa and Satsuma
against me, or the Sh@ogunate. If, I should
say when Satsuma and Tosa separately or
together attack you I bind myself to support you at
once with massive force."
  "Next?" Ogama asked impassively.
  "You agree not to take sides against me, as I
agree not to take sides against you."
  "Next?"
  "From today, quietly, each in our own way, we
work to annul the marriage."
  "Next?"
  "Last: the Gates. You agree that legal,
legitimate Sh@ogunate forces take back
control from dawn tomorrow."
  Ogama's face closed. "I already showed you
I am the legal and legitimate
representative of the Deity."
  "I already pointed out, though the document is
certainly signed correctly, the signature
was, regretfully obtained
by misrepresentation."
  "So sorry, no."
  "The Gates must come back into Sh@ogunate
control."
  "Then we have little left to talk about."
  Yoshi sighed. His eyes slitted. "Then,
sadly, there will be a new request from the Emperor
--for you to leave the Gates and leave Ky@oto with
all your men."
  Just as coldly Ogama stared back at him.
"I doubt it."
  "I, Toranaga Yoshi, guarantee it. In
six or seven days Sh@ogun Nobusada and his
wife are within the palace. As Guardian I have
immediate access to him--and to her. Both will see the
correctness of my argument--about the Gates and much
else."
  "What much else?"
  "The Gates should not be a problem for you,
Ogama-dono. I would give guarantees not
to flaunt this in your face, would "gratefully
accept your kind invitation to assume control,"
would not fortify them against you. What is so
difficult? The Gates are mostly a symbol.
I advise you formally, to continue the peace and
ensure order in the Land until Anjo is
onwards, the Sh@ogunate should have their place
there."
  Ogama hesitated, in a quandary. Yoshi could
easily have such another "request" sent to him,
that he would have to accept. "I will give you an
answer, in a month."
  "So sorry, noon on the sixth day from now is
the limit."
  "Why?"
  "In five days Nobusada reaches Otsu.
By the dusk on the sixth day Nobusada will go through
the Gates. I require possession,
temporary possession, before that." It was said so
gently and so politely.
  Their eyes locked. Noncommittally, but
equally politely, Ogama said, "I will think
about all of this, Yoshi-dono." Then he bowed,
Yoshi bowed, both men walked to their palanquins
and everyone in the square sighed with relief that their
ordeal was over and the expected bloodbath had not
happened.

                 

    Friday, 21st November:
  The way station of Otsu had been bustling all
day in a crescendo of excitement, anticipation
paired with fear over final preparations for tonight's
stop of the impossibly august visitors,
Sh@ogun Nobusada and the Princess Yazu.
For weeks the citizens had been brooming
streets, cleaning all dwellings, hovels,
outhouses--roofs, walls, wells, gardens
manicured--new tiles, shojis, tatamis,
verandas, with the Inn of Many Flowers, the best and
biggest in the whole of Otsu, still in a state of
near panic.
  It had begun the moment it was known the Hallowed
Travellers had declined to stay in the nearby
Sh@ogunate castle of Sakamoto that had
graced the area since before Sekigahara,
selecting the Inn instead: "Everything must be
perfect!" the Patron wailed, awed and at the
same time petrified. "Anything not perfect will
merit beheading or at the very least a whipping, man
woman or child! Tales of the honor done to us this
one night will be remembered through the ages
--our successes or failures! The Lord High
Sh@ogun himself? In all his glory? His wife,
a sister of the Deity? Oh ko. ..."
  Late in the afternoon, veiled, surrounded by guards
and counselors and well screened from being observed,
Sh@ogun Nobusada hurried from his palanquin
through the gates into the isolated section of the Inn
reserved for him, with the Princess and their entourage
of personal bodyguards, servants, her
ladies-in-waiting and maids. There were forty
traditional raised bungalows of four rooms
each, surrounding the inner sanctum of the
Sh@ogun's sleeping quarters and bathhouse, many
of the covered verandas interlocking in a maze of
pleasing walks and bridges over delicate
pools and streams that came down from tiny mountains
and all self-contained within a high, thick hedge of
manicured hemlocks.
  The room was warm and spotless, new tatamis
and polished charcoal braziers. Nobusada
threw his veiled hat and outer clothes aside,
tired and querulous. As always the palanquin had
been uncomfortable and the ride bumpy. "I hate
this place already," he said to their Chamberlain whose
head was touching the floor beside those of an echelon of
maids. "It's so small and stinks and I ache
all over! Is the bath ready?"
  "Ah yes Sire, everything as you require."
  "Otsu at long last, Sire," Princess
Yazu said gaily, sweeping in with several
ladies-in-waiting, "tomorrow we arrive home and
everything will be marvelous." She dropped her
huge, also veiled hat, and outer clothes.
Maids scrambled to gather them up. "Tomorrow we will
be home! Home, Sire! Bypassing a few
way stations will be well worth it, neh?"
  "Oh yes, Yazu-chan if you say so," he
said, smiling at her, quickly caught up in her
exuberance.
  "You will meet all my friends, cousins, aunts,
uncles, elder sister and baby sister, my dear
stepbrother Sachi, he's nine this year ..." she
twirled with happiness, "and hundreds of less
close relatives and in a few days you'll
meet the Emperor and he will greet you as his
brother too and solve all our problems and we will
live in tranquility ever after. It's cold in
here. Why isn't everything ready? Where is the
bath?"
  Their Chamberlain--a portly,
greying man of fifty with few teeth and heavy
jowls--had already been here a day with an advance
party of special maids and cooks to prepare their
quarters, and particular foods and fruits, with an
abundance of polished rice, that the Sh@ogun's
delicate stomach required and the Princess
demanded. Superb flower arrangements by a Master
of ikibana abounded. Again he bowed, inwardly
cursing her. "Extra charcoal heaters are
ready, Imperial Highness. The bath is ready,
your light meal just as you and Sh@ogun Nobusada
ordered, dinner the same. It will be the most
sumptuous ..."
  "Emiko! Our bath!"
  At once her chief lady-in-waiting led her
out and down the corridor, cocooned by other
ladies and maids like the queen bee she was.
Nobusada glared up at the Chamberlain and
stamped his tiny foot. "Am I to be kept
waiting? Show me the bath and send for the masseuse,
I want my back rubbed now. And make sure
there is no noise--I forbid noise!"
  "Yes Sire, the Captain issues the order
daily and I will send the masseuse to the
bathhouse, Sire. Sako will b--"
  "Sako? She's not as good as Meiko--where's
Meiko?"
  "So sorry, she's sick, Sire."
  "Tell her to get better! Tell her to be
better by sunset. No wonder she's sick. I
feel sick! This foul journey! Baka! How
many days on the road? It should be at least
fifty-three and it's less than ... why all the
haste ..."
  The Captain of the Escort waited for the
Chamberlain in the garden. He was in his thirties,
bearded, highly trained, a renowned Master of
Swords. His adjutant hurried up.
  "Everything is secure, sir."
  "Good. It should all be routine by now," the
Captain said, his voice weary and edged. Both
wore light travelling armor and hats and two
swords over Sh@ogunate tunics and
pantaloons. "Only one more day--then our
problems get worse. I still cannot believe the
Council and Guardian would allow such a
dangerous venture."
  His adjutant had heard the same thing said every
day. "Yes, Captain. At least we will be in
our own barracks, with hundreds more
men."
  "Not enough, never enough, we should have never left.
But we did and karma is karma. Check the rest
of the men and make sure the evening roster of guards
is correct. And then tell the horse master
to look at my mare, to take a look at her
left foot, she may have split her hoof ..."
Shoeing horses was unknown in Japan at this time.
"She almost shied passing the barrier, then come back
and report." The man hurried away.
  The Captain was more satisfied than usual.
His tour of the Inn and its grounds within the high,
giant perimeter bamboo fences, and particularly
this sector, the hedged area with a single gateway,
had reassured him that the Sh@ogun's cluster of
bungalows was easy to defend, that all other
travellers had been forbidden the Inn for this night,
that the watch knew the password and were clear on their
prime duty: no one was allowed within five
metres of the Sh@ogun or his wife uninvited, and
no one, ever, with any weapons--except the
Guardian, the Council of Elders and himself, and
any guards accompanying him. The law was well
known, the punishment for an armed approach death, for
both the armed man and the unalert guards--unless
pardoned by the Sh@ogun personally.
  "Ah, Chamberlain! Is there any change of
plans?"
  "No, Captain." The old man sighed and
mopped his brow, his jowls shaking. "The August
Ones are bathing as usual, then they will rest as
usual, take their real bath and massage at
sunset as usual, after which they will dine as usual,
play Go as usual and so to bed. All is in
order?"
  "Here, yes." The Captain had a garrison
of a hundred and fifty samurai at any one time
within the compound that measured about two hundred
metres square. A unit of ten men guarded the
only entrance, a pleasing bridge over a stream
that led to tall decorative beams and equally
ornate gates. Around the whole perimeter hedge
a samurai was stationed every ten paces. These would be
relieved by fresh units from the six hundred
samurai lodging in barracks just outside the main
gate or nearby in other Inns. Patrols would
scour the garden and fence line discreetly as noise
and an obvious samurai presence infuriated the
Princess and therefore her husband.
  Above them the clouds were thickening, a
bleak, misted sun not yet on the horizon, a
high wind toying with the clouds. It was cold and
promised to be colder. Servants were lighting
lanterns amongst the shrubs, their light already
reflected in the pools, and glistening off rocks
that had been moistened for that effect moments ago.
  "It's beautiful," the Captain said.
"Easily the best, though most of the other Inns have
been good." This was the first time he had ever made such
a journey. All his life he had been within or
near Yedo Castle, with or near Nobusada,
or the previous Sh@ogun. "Beautiful, yes,
but I'd rather have the Lord Sh@ogun and his wife in
Sakamoto Castle than here. You should have
insisted."
  "I tried, Captain but ... but she
decided."
  "I will be glad when we are in our own
barracks, when they are within the palace walls and
even gladder when we and they are safe at home in
Yedo Castle."
  "Yes," the Chamberlain said, privately
weary of his Master and Mistress and the constant
fault finding, nagging and petulance. Still, he
thought, his back aching, wanting a bath and massage
too, and the attentions of his youthful friend, I
suppose I would be the same if I was as
exalted as them, so mollycoddled from birth, and
only sixteen. "May I ask the password,
Captain?"
  "Until the middle of the night it is "Blue
Rainbow.""

  Two hundred metres away on the eastern
outskirts of the village, an old broken-down
farmhouse huddled at the end of an alley not far
from the Tokaid@o and the Otsu barrier. Inside,
the leader of the shishi attack team, a Choshu youth
called Saigo glowered at the farmer, his wife,
four children, father and mother, brother and a maid who
knelt petrified, crowded into a corner. This was
the only room and it served for living eating working
sleeping. A few scrawny chickens in a
rafter cage clucked nervously. "Remember
what I told you. You know nothing, have seen
nothing."
  "Yes Lord, certainly, Lord," the old man
whimpered.
  "Shut up! Turn your backs, face the
corner and close your eyes, all of
you. Tie your sashes around your eyes!"
  They obeyed. Instantly.
  Saigo was eighteen, tall and strongly
built, with a rugged handsome face and he wore a
short dark tunic and pantaloons similar to the
samurai at the Inn and two swords, straw
sandals, no armor. When he was satisfied the
peasants were blind as well as docile, he sat
beside the door and peered out through rips in the window
paper and began to wait.
  He could see the barrier and guard houses
clearly. It was not yet sunset so the barrier was
still open to latecomers. It had taken him and his men
many days to find this place, ideal for their
purposes. The back door led to a maze of
alleys and paths, perfect for a sudden retreat.
This afternoon, the moment the Sh@ogun's party had
passed through the barrier, he had taken sudden
possession.
  Footsteps. His hand readied his sword, then
relaxed. Another youth came in silently, to be
followed by another from a different direction.
Soon seven more were within. Outside one stood
guard, another at the corner of the alley that joined
with the Tokaid@o, with an eleventh man, hiding in
the village, to act as courier to gallop the glad
tidings of success to Katsumata in Ky@oto that
would signal the attack on Ogama and the
Gates. They were tough young men, dressed as he was
without armor and identification, formerly goshi--the
lowest rank of samurai--now ronin, all more or
less the same age, nineteen to twenty-two.
Only Saigo, eighteen, and Tora,
seventeen, his Satsuma second in command, were
younger. Drafts through rents in the window shivered them
--that and their tension.
  With signs he motioned them to check their
swords, shuriken and other lethal weapons--no
need for words during the whole operation. As much as
could be planned had been decided over the days.
They all agreed it was to be conducted in silence.
A glance out of the window. The sun was touching the
horizon, sky clear. It was time.
  Solemnly he bowed to them and they bowed to him.
  He turned his attention back to the peasants.
"Three men will be outside," he said harshly,
"One rustle out of any of you until I get
back and they'll fire the farm."
  Again the old man whimpered.
  Saigo gestured to the others. They
followed him. So did the outside guard and the one
on the corner. No turning back now. Those who
were Buddhist had said a final prayer before a
shrine, those who were Shinto had lit a last stick
of incense and so joined their spirit with the thread of smoke
that represented the fragility of life. All had
written their death poems and sewn them to the breast
of their tunics. Proudly they had given their
correct fiefs, only the names were false.
  Once in the alley they split up into pairs,
each taking an independent route. Soon they were
in position, crouched down in the tall weeds and
coarse vegetation beside the perimeter fence at the
back of the Inn, within sight of each other, Saigo
at the southeast corner. The fence was three
metres high and strongly made of giant
bamboo and spiked at the top. By now shadows were
losing form in the fading light.
  Waiting. Heartbeats heavy in their chests,
palms sweaty, the slightest rustle an enemy
patrol. Strange, strong taste in every mouth.
Stabbing pains in the loins. Somewhere nearby a
cricket began its urgent mating call,
reminding Saigo of his death poem:

A cricket with its joy filled song,
Dies quickly anyway.
Better to be joy filled than sad.

  He felt his eyes mist as the sky was misting.
So beautiful to be so happy yet so sad.
  From inside the fence they could hear voices of
servants, maids, occasionally samurai, the
clatter of metal dishes for the kitchen area was not
far away. In the distance a samisen and the singer.
Waiting. Sweat fell down Saigo's face.
Then he heard the approaching, barely perceptible
rustle of a kimono and a girl whisper, "Blue
Rainbow ... Blue Rainbow." Then silence.
Again sounds of the Inn.
  At once he motioned to Tora, beside him.
Silently this youth hurried to the other units and
gave them the words and came back again. At
Saigo's signal each pair found the ladders
they had made, camouflaged and hidden in the wild
undergrowth so carefully, set them against the fence.
Again he watched the sky. As the last thread of
sunlight went, another signal and they went up
and over the fence as one man, jumping to the ground that
was soft and tilled, crouching motionlessly
in the meticulous shrubbery but ready for an instant
frontal attack.
  Miraculously, no alarm yet. They looked
up, warily. Ahead, sixty metres away, was
the Sh@ogun's section, the thatched roofs showing just
above the tall, thick hedge of hemlock, the
roofs of the central sleeping section and bathhouses
a little higher. The main entrance was well away from
them, its doors still open. Everything exactly as
they expected. Except for the guards, many more than
planned for. Bile jumped into their mouths.
  To their right were the main kitchens with great steaming
cauldrons and massed staff--more guards there.
Left and all around the compound were a scattering of
guest cottages, in other gardens with streams and
bridges, each with a well-tended entrance path
curling through the shrubs. Silence there and no lights
within, just one lantern at the front veranda. More
anguish, they had expected them to be occupied and
to serve as cover and a necessary diversion.
  Karma, Saigo thought. Even so our positions
are as we predicted, so are those of the enemy, the
plan is good and we know the password. During the
previous two weeks, disguised as an ordinary
samurai traveller, he had found the correct
courtesan and inveigled his way into her emotions so
that soon he had been taken on a secret
guided tour of the grounds--even to the places where the
Hallowed Travellers were to rest.
  "Why not?"' he had whispered, "Who will know?
They're not due here for days--ah you are so
beautiful. Let us join where a Sh@ogun and a
sister of the Son of Heaven will join--that will be something
to whisper to our grandchildren, eh? I think I shall never
leave you ..."
  It had been equally easy to find a bathhouse
maid who was secretly fanatic for shishi, and
to persuade her there was no risk to listen and whisper
a few words into the night.
  He felt Tora touch his arm. Anxiously the
youth pointed. A patrol had come through the far
gates. It began to circle the grounds. Small
pools of light were beneath the lanterns.
Inevitably the patrol would come this way and be very
close. His signal, the call of a night bird,
gave the order.
  At once they sank deeper into the foliage and
kept their heads lowered, hardly breathing. The
patrol approached, and then passed without seeing
them--just as Katsumata had forecast when
he had suggested their attack plan: "Initially
it will be easy to be missed in the dark. Never
forget surprise is with you. Your infiltration will be
totally unexpected. Who would dare to attack the
Sh@ogun when he is surrounded by so many men? At
a way station? Impossible! Remember, with
stealth, surprise and ferocious speed two or
three of you will reach the kernel--and one is enough."
  Saigo watched the enemy marching away. A
marvelous glow pervaded him and all his confidence
returned. Another short wait until the enemy
patrol had turned the corner, then he motioned
for the attack teams to move into their predetermined
positions. Protected from view by the shrubbery,
four men slithered away to his right, two to his
left. When all were in position, he took a
deep breath to help slow his heartbeat. His
signal, again the call of a night bird, gave the
order to begin.
  At once the pair on his far right eased out of the
shrubs onto the path, adjusting the ties on their
pantaloons, and began strolling away, their arms
around each other as lovers will. Within moments they had
been noticed by the guards at the nearest hedge.
"You two halt!"
  The two youths obeyed and one called out,
"Blue Rainbow, Blue Rainbow, Lord
Sergeant" and both laughed, pretending to be shy
at being seen, then continued to stroll away, hand in
hand.
  "Halt! Who are you?"
  "Ah, so sorry, just friends on a nightly
stroll," the youth said in his softest, most gentle
voice, "Blue Rainbow, have you forgotten our
password?"
  One of the samurai laughed and said, "If the
Captain catches you "strolling" in the bushes
around here you'll get more than a Blue Rainbow and
both pairs of cheeks will know another type of
beating!"
  Again both youths pretended to laugh.
Unhurried, they walked away, ignoring more
strident calls to stop. Finally the Sergeant
shouted, "You two. Come here, at once!" They
faced him a moment, calling out plaintively there
was no harm in what they were doing. Saigo and the
others, covered by the diversion had been crawling
into final positions. Taut with excitement that they
had not been noticed, they rested a second, knowing
this diversion was almost over. The sound of the
night bird Saigo made this time was loud enough
to reach the two youths.
  Without hesitation, they pretended to laugh and ran
off gaily, hand in hand, directly away from the
guards as though playing a game. Their path
carelessly took them through a pool of light and
allowed them to be seen clearly for the first time. With a
shout of rage the Sergeant and four men charged in
pursuit. Sentries at the far main gate
peered into the darkness to see what was happening, and those
guards at the hedge who could see beckoned others
nearby, all of them alert.
  The two shishi were quickly surrounded. Back
to back, swords ready, they stood silently at
bay under a barrage of questions, nothing effeminate
now in their stance or the way their lips were drawn
back from the teeth.
  Enraged, the Sergeant stepped forward a pace.
The youth opposing him readied. His right hand darted
into his sleeve and came out with a shuriken and before the
Sergeant could duck or move aside the
five-pointed circle of steel was embedded in his
throat and he fell burbling, choking in his own
blood. Both shishi leapt to the attack but neither
could break out of the net and though they fought bravely,
wounding three of the samurai, they were no match for the
others who, though wanting to disarm them and capture
them alive, could not do so.
  One of the youths took a sword thrust through the
lower part of his back and cried out, severely wounded
but not enough to kill him immediately. The other whirled
to his aid and in that instant was mortally wounded and
crumpled, dying. "Sonno-joi," he gasped.
Aghast the other heard him, made one last
impotent attempt to close with an attacker,
then abruptly turned his sword on himself and
fell on it.
  "Find the Captain," a samurai panted,
blood streaming from a sword slash in his arm. One
of the others ran off as the rest collected around the
bodies, the Sergeant still gurgling though dying
fast. "Nothing we can do for him. Never seen a
shuriken so fast." Someone turned the two dead
men over. "Look, death poems! Shishi all
right--eeee, both Satsumas! They must have gone
mad."
  "Sonno-joi!" another muttered, "that's not
mad."
  "It's mad to say that aloud," a hard-faced
ashigaru warned him. "If an officer
hears you ..."
  "Listen, these motherless dogs had the password,
there's a traitor here!" More nervously they
looked at each other.
  Over on the right the kitchen staff were
transfixed, not knowing what was going on. Many
samurai had been drawn away from the hedge and
stood gaping at the bodies, creating the opening
Katsumata and Saigo had planned.
  Again Saigo signalled. His two strongest
fighters broke out of the bushes on his extreme
right and ran for the far southeast corner. Almost at
once they were spotted. Cursing, the two nearest
samurai rushed to intercept as others ran to their
aid. Violent hand-to-hand combat began again,
darkness helping the attackers immeasurably.
One defender screamed and went down clawing his
half-severed arm. More samurai were drawn away
from the hedge immediately in front of Saigo and just before
the samurai overwhelmed the two fighters, in a
coordinated maneuver the two shishi broke off
the battle and pretended to flee pell-mell for the
fence near the kitchens, well away from Saigo
and the three final teams. As they fled they unwound
ropes from their waists with small grapples on the
end. Nearing the fence they threw them deftly,
caught the top, and began to climb, their pursuers
redoubling their efforts.
  By now all attention was on these two. Guards
near the entrance and the far side of the Sh@ogun's
complex, still not knowing exactly what was happening
other than that two ronin were loose in the compound and
were now trying to escape over the fence, hurried
to intercept them. Others ran out and down the
perimeter fence to catch them on that side.
  One of the shishi reached the top of the fence but before
he could scramble over it a knife impaled him and
he fell backwards into the shrubberies. The other
man abandoned his rope, leapt beside his friend and just had
time to see him bury his own knife in his throat
to avoid capture before he went down under a
flurry of blows. He twisted and turned and fought
with great strength but was soon disarmed and pinioned to the
earth by four samurai.
  "Now, who are you?" a samurai asked, out of
breath. "Who are you and what's your game?"
  "Sonno-joi ... obey your Emperor,"
the man panted and again tried to fight out of their
grip but could not. Others were collecting around him and
he was confident he had done his part in the
attack and could continue his diversion for a little while
longer, unafraid of capture because there was a
poison vial in the neck of his kimono within reach
of his teeth. "I am Hiroshi Ishii of
Tosa, and demand to see the Sh@ogun."
  From where he was hidden Saigo and the five men with
him could hear their compatriot but their attention was
fixed on the hedge facing them and on the far
entrance. The few remaining guards left it
to gather around the doomed man and now, at last, the
target was open. "Attack!"
  The six men leapt to their feet and charged,
Saigo and Tora leading the wedge. They had
covered perhaps half the distance before there was a warning
shout and samurai surrounding the bodies of the first
team began running back to head them off. At
once Ishii redoubled his efforts to escape,
shouting and raving to distract those holding him but a
fist smashed him into unconsciousness.
  "You two stay here," the samurai panted,
sucking his bruised knuckles. "Don't kill
the son of a dog, we'll need him alive." He
got up painfully and limped off to join the others,
a bad sword cut on his thigh.
  Some of the defenders were gaining on the six shishi
who still ran directly at the hedge that curled
away in both directions. "Now!" Saigo
ordered. Immediately the pair to his right turned
back into defensive positions, shurikens in their
hands. Warily the running samurai slowed, darted
left and right, feinted, then attacked, the
shurikens finding targets but not wounding badly enough and
another hand-to-hand began, six samurai against the
two of them.
  Reinforcements were running from the main gate,
others from the first diversion, all of them, defenders
and attackers, converging on their lodestar--the
gateway to the Sh@ogun's lair. When the men from
the Inn's main gate saw to their horror that the
hedges and entrance had been left completely
unguarded--though the doors were closed--with Saigo
and three others running fast and not far from the hedge,
they swung away to position themselves between the shishi
and the entrance, leaving others to attack them, and
frantically raced to protect the gate. Behind
Saigo and Tora the two fighters were attacking,
retreating, still covering their rear. Both men had
sustained wounds but two samurai were on the ground
writhing with pain. Four against two with others not far
away.
  "Now!" Saigo ordered and the pair on his
left broke away and stabbed for the entrance. No
doubt they would reach it before the defenders and this
caused others heading for Saigo also to change
direction and make for the entrance as well. At
once Saigo and Tora whirled and joined the
fight behind them. Their ferocious charge dispatched
two of the remaining four samurai and helped
eliminate the remaining enemy--only Saigo and
Tora, though breathing heavily, were untouched.
  At once Saigo ordered, "Go!" the two
men sang out, "sonno-joi" and, painfully,
rushed to support the attack on the entrance,
drawing off more samurai, leaving Saigo and
Tora to resume their headlong charge for the hedge.
  The first pair of shishi attacking the gateway
reached the narrow path and ran for the doors. One
man began to push them open. At that moment an
arrow thwacked viciously into the wood and then both
men were hit and shortly riddled with more arrows from
bowmen amongst the reinforcements. They cried out,
impotently tried to continue, and died on their
feet. The second team gained the pathway. One
rushed at the oncoming samurai, the other went for the
gates, stumbled over his dead comrades, and died,
pierced with four arrows. His friend hit the samurai
head-on, and was quickly killed. Only minutes
had passed since the beginning.
  Now the way was open to the pathway. In moments
the fleetest of the defenders would reach the entrance and
then there would be no way that Saigo and Tora,
almost at the end of their run and due to turn for the
gateway, could reach their goal. So the pace of the
defenders slackened, the bowmen took aim
leisurely, confident of victory. To their
astonishment, instead of wheeling along the hedge,
Saigo and Tora kept the straight line of their
rush and hurled themselves forward at the hedge, side
by side.
  Their momentum caused them to burst through it, that and the
accuracy of their leap. Over preceding days,
Saigo found that though the branches were tightly
interwoven, the trunks of the trees were about half a
metre apart, and, he had surmised, if judged
correctly, a rush would carry them through.
  It did, successfully, though the branches
lashed them bloodily around the face and arms. The
two men picked themselves up exactly where Saigo
had planned--on the meandering path beside the veranda that
led to the bathhouse. For a moment no one
was in sight, then several terrified maids and
servants gaped at them from a doorway and
vanished. Saigo led the soundless dash down the
path and up the steps and around the veranda corner.
Two anxious officials came out of nowhere,
unarmed and unprepared, one of them the Chamberlain.
Saigo cut both down, killing the Chamberlain
instantly, and wounding the other, and charged onwards.
Tora finished off this man, jumped over the
bodies and rushed in pursuit.
  Along the veranda and around the corner and smashing
through the light shoji screen to burst into the
bathhouse. Half-naked maids stared at them
panic stricken: swords bloody, faces
scratched and bloody, kimonos ripped and
bloody. The air was warm, sweet-smelling,
humid.
  Saigo bellowed with rage. The steaming, shallow
bath, fed from a natural hot-spring was empty,
so were the four wooden steam boxes, and so were the
massage tables, except one. In an instant
he saw every detail of the tiny, naked girl lying
there, the shock in her eyes, her half-opened
mouth, teeth blackened, her plume of jet hair
twisted into a stark white towel, more towels under
her, small breasts and limbs and feet, dark
brown nipples, all of her curved, inviting,
golden skin now pinkish from the heat of the bath,
oiled and fragrant--and the blind, half-naked
masseuse, standing motionlessly over her, head
cocked, listening intently.
  So easy to kill the girl and all of them but his
orders were not to harm the Princess at all costs.
Nonetheless his fury at being cheated--for their timing
had been perfect, their intelligence perfect and the
Sh@ogun's pattern never varying--made his head
seem about to explode. The fury turned to lust and
shivered him, all of him wanting her, now, fast,
brutally, any way, the wife before the husband,
death to both of them but first her splayed.
  His lips came away from his teeth and he charged
across the expanse. The maids scattered, one
fainted, the Princess gasped and lay motionless,
petrified. But his obsession with the Sh@ogun
diverted him and his rush bypassed her and took him
to the shoji door where again he crashed through and, once
more, with Tora close behind, unerringly led the run
along verandas towards the sleeping quarters and his
prey, gardens to his right, rooms left--no
longer a thinking man just a raging killing
animal. Shoji doors were open, faces there.
Maids and youths and ladies-in-waiting and
servants attracted by the commotion, dressed or
half dressed for the evening or for bed or for bath,
gaped at them.
  No guards in these rooms. Yet.
  Still no opposition. Yet.
  A few more rooms to pass, doors, faces,
and then he would turn the last corner and last
veranda. Saigo's anticipation crested for this was a
delightful covered walkway, gardens right and
left, no more rooms with waiting guards to worry
about, and at the end the Sh@ogun's sleeping
quarters where he himself and the courtesan had
secretly bedded.
  All senses tuned for expected danger,
Tora a few paces behind him, running as fast,
sounds of men approaching enemy, pounding feet.
Another room passed. Only one more doorway,
last danger. Faces at the door, a doctor
and a coughing youth stared at him in shock, then he was
around the corner and, together, they began the last
charge.
  Both men skidded to a stop. Their hearts
stopped. Ahead an officer and three samurai
came out of the sanctuary door, swords drawn,
to stand waiting for them. The barest hesitation then,
Saigo rushed to the kill, his or theirs, Tora
equally committed--only these four men between them and the
Sh@ogun they protected. "Sonno-joi!"
  The Captain held the first charge, parried the
blow and locked sword to sword, then twisted and
hacked at Saigo as two other samurai
attacked Tora, the last staying in reserve as
ordered. Saigo deflected the blow and slashed
back but missed. Another ferocious flurry of
blow and counterblow, Saigo supremely
confident, so near to success, pressing the
attack, feeling superhuman and that his blade,
almost of its own volition, was seeking enemy flesh
as it would in seconds destroy the boy Sh@ogun
...
  There was a blinding flash behind his eyes, the pounding
in his head soared and he suddenly saw that doctor
again and that boy again and remembered someone telling him
it was believed the boy Sh@ogun had a hacking
cough--no portraits of him, of course, not one
of the shishi ever having seen him, of course: "If
you do not catch him in the bathhouse,"
Katsumata had said, "you will
recognize him by his blackened teeth, the cough,
his nearness to the Princess, the quality of his
robes--remember, both he and the Princess
detest guards nearby."
  With enormous, heightened strength, howling like a
wild beast, Saigo hacked at the Captain who
slipped on the polished floor and was, for an
instant, helpless. But Saigo did not deliver
the death blow, instead whirled back for the boy--and the
last samurai saw the opening he had been ordered
to wait for. His sword went deep into Saigo's
side but Saigo felt none of it and cut
impotently at the Sh@ogun wraith in front of
him, again and once again and slid to the floor stabbing,
already dead but not knowing it.
  The Captain had leapt to his feet and
hurtled to the attack on Tora, impaled him,
and then like an expert butcher, withdrew the blade and
beheaded him with a single blow.
  "Do the same to him," he gasped, pointing at
Saigo, his chest heaving as he tried to regain his
breath, and rushed back up the veranda. At the
corner, men from the entranceway came pounding up,
headed by his second in command. He cursed him and
them, shoved him out of the way and hurried past
saying: "Every man on this shift ordered to the square
outside the Inn, disarmed and on their knees. You
too!"
  His heart was still pounding and he was enraged and not
yet over his panic. Just before sunset
Nobusada had testily sent for him: "Take
all guards from inside the hedge. Ridiculous
to have them here, the rooms so small and awful! Are
you helpless, so inept you can't secure this nasty
little Inn? Must we bathe with guards, sleep with
guards, eat with them looking at us? Go away,
tonight I forbid all guards here!"
  "But Sire I must ins--"'
  "You will insist on nothing. No guards inside
the hedge tonight. This meeting is ended!" There was
nothing the Captain could do, but then there was no need
to worry. Of course everything was secure.
  When the first muffled sounds of the attack had
reached him he was making a final, satisfactory
circuit inside the hedge, four men with him--the
hedge also acting as a fine sound barrier. By the time
he had reached the gate doors and looked out, he
had been appalled to see four men charging the
hedge, two rushing for the gates. His first thought was
for the Sh@ogun and he ran for the bathhouse
but the Chamberlain had called out: "What's going
on?"'
  "Men are attacking us, get the Sh@ogun out
of the bath!"
  "He's not there, he's with the doctor ..."
  Another panic dash, bypassing the bathhouse
to the inner quarters, finding them empty, a frightened
maid saying that the Lord Sh@ogun was in one of the
rooms on the next veranda and then coming out and seeing
the two men charging, no way to protect the
Sh@ogun now but thinking if these two were attacking
here perhaps they had missed his liege lord ...
  He knew he would not truly be alive until
he found him alive. This took no time.
Nobusada was coughing and raving, still in fright, others
around him adding to the tumult. Quickly he learned the
Princess was unharmed though also hysterical. His
panic left him. He disregarded Nobusada's
rage, his voice icy, and every soldier nearby
quailed: "Get a courier and four men on the
double to rush a report ahead and except for this
present shift, all guards here on the double, every
man within the compound, fifty men around the sleeping
quarters, two men at each corner of every veranda.
And ten men permanently in sight of the Lord
Sh@ogun until he and she are safely within the
palace walls."

        END OF VOLUME VI






















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume VII of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 1349-1578




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK TWO

                 

    Friday, 21st November: (continued)
  In midmorning the next day, within the palace
walls, Yoshi hurried through the outer rim of
gardens in the light rain. General Akeda was beside
him. "This is terribly dangerous, Sire," he
said, afraid that every shrub or thicket, however
carefully tended, might hide enemies.
  Both men wore light armor and swords--a
rarity here where all samurai and all weapons were
forbidden, except for the ruling Sh@ogun and an immediate
guard of four, the Leader of the Elders and
Guardian of the Heir.
  It was almost noon. The two men were late and
noticed none of the beauty surrounding them, lakes
and bridges and flowering shrubs and trees groomed
and cherished over centuries. Whenever a gardener
saw them, the man would kowtow until they were out of
sight. Over their armor were straw overmantles
against the rain. All morning there had been
intermittent showers. Yoshi's pace quickened.
  This was not the first time he had hurried to a
clandestine meeting within the palace grounds--safe
but never truly safe. So difficult to have a
truly safe meeting anywhere, with a spy, informer,
or adversary--in secret almost impossible--
always afraid of ambush, poison or hidden
bowmen or musketeers. The same applied to every
daimyo. His own safety factor he knew was
very low. So low in fact that his father and grandfather had
taught him to accept the fact that death from old age
had no place in their karma.
  "We are as safe as anywhere on earth," he
said. "It would be unthinkable to break a truce
here."
  "Yes, except for Ogama. He is a
liar, cheat, he should be meat for vultures, his
head spiked."
  Yoshi smiled and felt better. Since the
appalling news of the shishi attack had arrived in
the middle of the night he had been more edged than ever
--more than when on the death of his uncle he had
been passed over as Sh@ogun and Nobusada
appointed instead, more than when tair@o Ii had
arrested him, his father and their families and sent them
to rot in foul quarters. He had made
preparations to rush two hundred men to meet the
entourage at the Ky@oto barrier, and at dawn
had sent Akeda secretly to Ogama to relate
what had happened and why a large party of men
equipped for war were leaving his stockade.
  "Tell Ogama all that we have been told,
and answer any of his questions, I want no
mistakes Akeda."
  "There will be none from me, Sire."
  "Good. Then give him the letter and request an
immediate answer." Yoshi had not told Akeda what
the letter contained, nor did his general ask. And when
Akeda returned Yoshi said, "Tell me
exactly what he did."
  "Ogama read the letter twice and spat,
cursed twice, threw it at his counselor,
Basuhiro, who read it with that stony, slimy
pockmarked face of his that gave nothing away, who
said, "Perhaps we should discuss this in private,
Sire." I told them I would wait, I did
and then after a reasonable time Basuhiro came out
and said, "My Lord agrees but he will come armed and
I will be armed." What's this all about, Sire?"'
  Yoshi told him and the old man went purple.
"You asked to meet him alone? With only myself as
guard? That is craziness, just because he says he will
come only with Basuhi--"'
  "Enough!" Yoshi knew the risks were great but
he had to gamble again, had to have an answer on his
proposal about the Gates and then, when he was about
to leave and one of the surfeit of Sh@ogunate
spies reported certain conversations overheard between
the shishi Katsumata and others at the Inn of
Whispering Pines he had been elated he had
asked for the meeting. "There he is!"
  Ogama was standing in the shade of a wide-branched
tree where they had agreed, Basuhiro at his
side. Both were clearly suspicious, expecting
treachery, but not as visibly nervous as Akeda.
Yoshi had proposed that Ogama come in through the
South Gate, he would use the East Gate,
leaving his palanquin and guards outside with their
safe conduct guaranteed. After the meeting, all
four would walk out of the East Gate together.
  As before the two adversaries walked towards
each other to speak alone. Akeda and Basuhiro
watched tensely.
  "So!" Ogama said after their formal greeting.
"A handful of shishi attack through hundreds of
guards like a knife through dung and almost
in Nobusada's bath, naked wife and bed before
they are caught. Ten men you say?"
  "Three were Choshu ronin, the two that got through
the hedge were Choshus, one of them the leader."
Yoshi was not over his fright at the attack, and
wondered if he dared draw his sword at this rare
opportunity to challenge Ogama alone--
Basuhiro presented no physical threat, with
or without Akeda.
  I need Ogama dead one way or another,
he thought, but not yet. Not when two thousand Choshu
hold the Gates and me in thrall. "All of them
died without doing harm, except to some guards, the
survivors not long on this earth. I hear you have
offered all your Choshu ronin an amnesty?" he
asked, his voice edging, wondering again if Ogama
had a secret hand in the planning which had been
impeccable and, if the truth was known, should have been
successful. "If shishi or not."
  "Yes," Ogama said, his mouth smiling.
"All daimyo should do the same, a quick and
simple way to control all ronin, shishi or not.
They are a pestilence that must be stopped."
  "I agree. Amnesty will not stop them. May
I ask, how many of your ronin have accepted your
offer?"
  Ogama laughed roughly, "Clearly not the ones
who were in the attack! One or two so far,
Yoshi-dono. How many are there in all? A
hundred? Not two hundred, of which twenty or
thirty may be Choshu? Choshu or not, never
mind." His face hardened. "I did not plan the
attack if that is what is in your mind, or know
about it." The mirthless smile returned.
"Unthinkable to have such a treasonous thought. Eh?
Easy to stamp shishi out if you and I wanted to
--but their slogan is not as easy to suppress,
if indeed it should be suppressed. Power should
return to the Emperor, gai-jin should be
expelled. Sonno-joi is a good slogan,
eh?"
  "I could say many things, Ogama-donno, but
allies should not bait one another. We are
allies? You agree?"
  Ogama nodded. "In principle yes."
  "Good," Yoshi said, hiding his astonishment that
Ogama had agreed to his conditions. "Within the
year you are Chief of the Elders. From noon I
garrison the Gates." He turned to go.
  "Everything as you said. Except the
Gates."
  The vein in Yoshi's forehead knotted. "But
I said I need the Gates."
  "So sorry." Ogama's hand had not tightened
on his sword though his feet had shifted into a
better fighting stance. "Secret allies yes,
war with Tosa yes, with Satsuma yes, the
Gates no. So sorry."
  For a moment Yoshi Toranaga said nothing.
He looked at him. Ogama stared back
unafraid, waiting, ready to fight if need be.
Then Yoshi sighed, wiped raindrops from the edge
of his wide-brimmed hat. "I want to be
allies. Allies should help one another. I have
a compromise, perhaps, but first I give you some
special information: Katsumata is here in
Ky@oto."
  The blood rushed into Ogama's face. "Not
possible, my spies would have told me."
  "He is here and has been here for some weeks."
  "There are none of Sanjiro's men in
Ky@oto, least of all that man. My spies would
have t--"
  "Ah, sorry," Yoshi said softly, "he is
here, secretly, not as Sanjiro's pathfinder and
spy, at least not openly. Katsumata is
shishi, a Sensei of shishi, and the leader of shishi
here, code name the Raven."
  Ogama gaped at him. "Katsumata is
the shishi leader?"
  "Yes. And a little more. Think for a moment: is he
not Sanjiro's most trusted, long-time
counselor and tactician? Did he outsmart you
on behalf of Sanjiro with his false pact and
foil you at Fushimi and allow Sanjiro
to escape? Does that not mean Sanjiro of
Satsuma is secretly the real leader of shishi
and that all of their assassinations are part of his
general plan to overthrow all of us, you
particularly, to become Sh@ogun?"
  "That's always been Sanjiro's goal, of
course," Ogama said, momentarily glazed, many
hitherto unexplained occurrences now falling
into place. "If he controls all shishi too
..." he stopped, suddenly infuriated that
Takeda had never told him. Why? Is Takeda
not a spy for me, not a true secret vassal
after all? "Where is Katsumata now?"
  "One of your patrols almost ambushed him at the
Inn of Whispering Pines a few days
ago."
  Again color came into Ogama's face and he
almost spat. "He was there? We heard that shishi were
sleeping there but I never knew. ..." Once again
he choked with rage that Takeda had not forewarned him
that his hated enemy was within his grasp. Why? Never
mind, easy to deal with Takeda. First
Katsumata. I have not forgotten Katsumata
ruined my surprise attack on Sanjiro.
But for Katsumata, Sanjiro would be dead, I
would be overlord of Satsuma, and there would be no
need to talk with Toranaga Yoshi--he would be
on his knees in front of me. "Where is he
now? Do you know where?"
  "I know the safe house where he was last night,
perhaps tonight too." Yoshi added softly, "There are
over a hundred shishi in Ky@oto. They already
plan a mass attack on you."
  Ogama felt chilled, knowing there was no true
defense against a fanatic assassin not afraid
to die. "When?"
  "It was to be at dusk tomorrow--if the attack on
the Sh@ogun had been successful. Then, once you
were dead, with adherents amongst your troops, they
would seize the Gates."
  It took much of Ogama's strength not to tell
Yoshi a secret meeting with Takeda was due at
dusk tomorrow, a perfect moment for a surprise
attack. "And now that it was a failure?"
  "The information I have is that the leaders are meeting
tonight to decide. Now, formally you head their target
list, after Nobusada and myself."
  "Why?" Ogama spluttered. "I support
the Emperor, support the fight against the
gai-jin."
  Yoshi kept the smile off his face, knowing very
well. "Let us join forces tonight. I know their
meeting place, where Katsumata and most of the
leaders should be--there is a dawn to dusk curfew
in that part of the city."
  Ogama exhaled. "And the price?"
  "First, here is more information that seriously affects
both of us." To Ogama's further disquiet,
Yoshi related the details of the Elders'
meeting with Sir William and the other Ministers,
about his spy Misamoto, about Sir William's
threat to make an armed sortie here as soon as his
fleet returned, and how the threat and payment had
been finessed for the moment.
  "Their fleet will not pass my
Shimonoseki Straits--if I order it."
  "They could take the long route around South
Island."
  "Long route, short route, it makes no
difference. If they land in or near Osaka I,
or we will destroy them."
  "The first time. With great losses but yes,
gai-jin will be repulsed. However, two days ago
I received a secret report from the department of the
Bakufu here who deal with China information." He
brought out the scroll. "Here, read it for yourself."
  "What does it say?" Ogama snapped.
  "That the Yokohama fleet sent to punish the
sinking of just one British ship devastated twenty
leagues of China's coastline, north of
Shanghai, burning all villages, sinking all
shipping."
  Ogama spat. "Pirates. Pirate
nests." He knew much about that area. In the past
it had been historic, though secret Choshu--and
Satsuma--policy to send raiders to the China
coast to pillage ruthlessly from Shanghai,
southwards beyond Hong Kong to the Taiwan
Straits. The Chinese called them wako,
pirates, hating and fearing them so much that, for
centuries Emperors of China had forbidden any
Japanese from landing on their shores, and all
trade between their lands was to be conducted only
by non-Japanese.
  "Pirates yes, but those scum are not cowards.
Not so long ago an army of these same gai-jin
humbled all China a second time and burned the
Emperor's Summer Palace and Peking at their
whim. Their fleets and armies are awesome in
power."
  "This is Nippon, not China." Ogama
shrugged, not prepared to be drawn out or
to divulge his plans for the defense of Choshu. But
he was thinking: my coasts are rugged and
rock-infested, difficult to invade and very
defensible, soon impregnable when all armed
emplacements are in place, and bunkers for my
fighters. "And we are not Chinese."
  "My thought is that we need peace between all
daimyos to gain time, to manipulate gai-jin,
to learn their cannon secrets and gun secrets
and ship secrets and how it seems this one foul little
island people, smaller than our land, has become the
wealthiest in the world and rules most of it."
  "Lies. Lies spread to frighten
cowards here."
  Yoshi shook his head. "I do not believe that.
First we must learn, then we can smash them, we cannot
now."
  "We can. This is the Land of the Gods. In
Choshu I have one cannon factory, soon there
will be others. Satsuma has three small
steamers, the beginnings of a shipyard, soon there will be
others." His face twisted. "We can smash
Yokohama and this fleet and by the time others
return we will be ready."
  Yoshi hid his surprise at the vehemence and
strength of the hatred, secretly elated he had
smoked out another weapon to use. "I agree.
My whole point. There, you see,
Ogama-dono," he said as though greatly
relieved, "we think the same though perhaps from
different points. We smash them but in time, we
must choose the time, gain their knowledge and let them give
us the means to spike their guns and their heads." His
voice firmed. "In one year you and I control
the Council and Bakufu. In three or four we
can buy many guns, cannon and ships."
  "Paid for how? Gai-jin are greedy."
  "One way is coal for their ships. Another
is gold." Yoshi explained his prospecting
scheme.
  "Clever," Ogama said, his lips twisted into a
strange smile. "In Choshu we have coal,
iron and trees for ships."
  "And one armament factory already."
  Ogama laughed, a good laugh, and Yoshi
laughed too and knew he had made a breakthrough.
"True, and my batteries increase monthly."
Ogama shifted his overmantle under the increasing
rain and added pointedly, "So does my resolve
to fire on enemy shipping, when I wish. Is that
all your information, Yoshi-dono?"
  "For the moment. May I advise you to slacken
your grip on the Straits--in any event they
are yours to play with. Yes, that's all for the moment,
but as an ally you will be given all kinds of
privileged information."
  "As an ally I would expect privileged
information." Ogama nodded half to himself. He
glanced back at Basuhiro then changed his mind
about consulting him--Yoshi is right, he thought,
leaders should have secrets. "We have talked enough.
Katsumata: I asked the price. A joint
attack tonight."
  "What would a very particular ally offer?"
  Ogama stretched to ease the grinding tension in his
neck and shoulders, expecting that question--for all his
bravado no fool. Time enough to vary an offer, he
thought, though neither of us would ever deign to lose
face by bartering like the despised Osaka rice
merchants. "You can garrison the Gates for one
month, twenty men only at each of the six
Gates, two hundred of my men stationed
nearby," Ogama smiled, "not near enough
to embarrass you. Any persons going in or out will
receive permits from your officer of the Gates as is
correct--who will have quietly and previously
consulted with my ... my liaison officer before
permits are granted."
  "Consult?"
  "Consult, as between privileged allies, so a
consensus can easily be arrived at." The easy
smile was gone. "If more than twenty of your men
appear, my men take possession and all
agreements are ended. Agreed?"
  Yoshi's eyes had flattened. No need
to make threats, obviously any trick on either
side would end all agreements. "I would prefer
forty men at each of the Gates--we can arrange
details of how the guard changes without problem--
and I garrison the Gates as long as Sh@ogun
Nobusada and the Princess Yazu are inside."
  Ogama had noted the change. "Sh@ogun
Nobusada, yes. But not the Princess who ...
who may stay inside permanently, eh? Forty?
Very well, forty at each Gate. Of course,
her brother, the Son of Heaven will not rescind his
memorial, his request to me to hold the Gates
against his enemies."
  "The Son of Heaven is the Son of Heaven but
I doubt if a cancellation would be forthcoming while
Sh@ogunate forces exercise their historic
rights."
  At once Ogama's expression was naked.
"Let you and I forget this polite back and forth and
speak plainly: I'll concede a face-saving
device on the Gates in return for
Katsumata and all the rest--your men become the
honor guard, your banners can be there and I
agree with a lot you said, yes, much of it, but I do
not concede my opposition to "historic rights"
or to the Sh@ogunate or Bakufu ..." he
stopped and, because he really wanted what was offered,
he made another concession, "... to the
present Sh@ogunate and Bakufu,
Yoshi-donno. Please excuse my bluntness,
it would be good to be allies, I did not expect
it would be possible or that I could agree
to anything."
  Yoshi nodded, hiding his glee. "I am
happy we can agree and I tell you bluntly
too we can agree to major changes, and little
ones. For example," he added lightly, "if
such a memorial arrived from the Emperor, it would
be a forgery."
  Now Ogama's smile was genuine and he felt
he had achieved a perfect compromise. "Good.
And now Katsumata."

  The attack on the shishi hideaway began a
few hours before dawn. Surprise was perfect.
Katsumata, all subleaders, and others were
inside. And Sumomo.
  The first moment the two lookouts became aware
of danger was when, just down the alley, muddy from the
rain, one of the hovels burst into flames to muffled
cries of alarm from the occupants and close
neighbors. At once these men and women--all
secret Bakufu plants--began to crowd the
alley in pretended panic, the diversion helping
to cover the stealthy approach of the attacking force.
As the sentries went to investigate, arrows came
out of the night and cut them down. One of them howled
an alarm before he died.
  At once the main force swarmed out of the night
to surround this whole section of slum dwellings.
Most of the men were Ogama's, at his request--
Yoshi had agreed saying that he would send a token
forty, handpicked men, under Akeda.
  In moments many of the assault group had lit
torches. These partially illuminated the target
hut, back and front, and a fusillade of arrows
went into every opening and weak spot. Then,
unexpectedly, the four Yoshi riflemen ran
into position, two at the back of the huts and two
in the front, and fired several volleys through the
paper walls.
  For an instant there was a stunned silence--
samurai, shishi, and all nearby slum
dwellers equally shocked--the sound of rapid
firing unheard of. Then the silence broke as
everyone but the assault group scattered for cover,
and screams and shouts came from the wounded within. A
hut adjoining the first blaze caught
fire and this fire spread rapidly next door
and next door and next door until both
sides of the far end of the alley became an
inferno, trapping many a family inside.
  The Ogama captain leading the raid paid no
attention to that hazard which only threatened
inhabitants but ordered the first attack wave
in, disregarding Yoshi's advice to torch the
hovels and let his riflemen pick off the shishi
as they broke from cover. Four Ogama
attackers fell under a vicious shishi sally from the
front door and side windows. A general fight
erupted both here and in the back alley as another
furious foray was contained, men flailing, hampered
by the confined space and mud and semi-darkness. Two
men breached the cordon to be cut down by others
waiting in ambush. Another volley into the hovel
was followed by another attempted breakout by a
frantic group of shishi, a helpless mission as
another circle awaited them beyond and then another.
Smoke from the fires began to hinder attackers
and the attacked.
  An order from Akeda. His men with torches
rushed close to the hovel and hurled them onto the
roof or through the shojis, swiftly retreating
to give a clear field to their comrades with
rifles. More firing and more deaths as another cluster
of shishi rushed out to join the shouting, screaming
melee. The stench of smoke and offal and blood and
fire and burning flesh and death began to fill the
damp night. The rain turned to drizzle.
  Well protected by personal guards,
Ogama and Yoshi were watching from a command position
away from the blaze and fighting. Both wore armor
and swords and Yoshi had his rifle slung. Beside
them were some Bakufu officials. In the raging
confusion, they were surprised to see a shishi dart
through the cordon and run up the alley, escaping
into a side alley obscured from attacking Choshu
samurai.
  "Is that Katsumata?" Ogama called out,
but his words were drowned as, without hesitation, Yoshi
had aimed and fired and loaded and fired again. The
man went down screaming, Ogama and everyone
nearby recoiling at the suddenness, not expecting
Yoshi to become personally involved. Taking his
time, Yoshi aimed again at the man squirming
helplessly in the dirt. The bullet shoved the
body backwards. A final tortured howl and it
became inert.
  "That is not Katsumata," Yoshi said,
disappointedly.
  Ogama cursed, his night vision not good. He
pulled his eyes off the body and looked at the
rifle, loose in Yoshi's hands, repressing a
shudder. "You use that well."
  "It is easy to learn, Ogama-dono, too
easy." With careful nonchalance, Yoshi put
another shell into the breech, fairly sure that this
would be the first rifle Ogama had seen. He had
brought it and his riflemen deliberately
to impress him, to keep him off balance, and make
him more wary about trying any assassination
attempts. "To kill like this is disgusting,
cowardly, dishonorable."
  "Yes, yes it is. May I see the gun
please?"
  "Of course." Yoshi put on the safety
catch. "It's American--the very latest
breech-loader. I take delivery of five
thousand shortly." His smile was thin, remembering
he had usurped Ogama's order. "My
ancestor was wise to outlaw all guns--anyone
can use one of these to kill, close up or from a
distance, daimyo, merchant, robber, ronin,
peasant, woman, child. My ancestor was very
wise. A pity we cannot do the same but gai-jin have
made it impossible."
  The rifle felt strange to Ogama, heavier
than a sword, oiled and deadly, and this added
curiously to the excitement of the raid, the killing
and screams and battle and knowing that spies had
reported Katsumata was truly inside so,
soon now, his hated enemy's head would be on
display. All this filled him with an untoward
sick sweet nausea.
  Good to kill like that without danger to yourself, he
told himself, his fingers caressing the barrel, but
Yoshi is right again. In the wrong hands ... all
other hands would be wrong. Five thousand? Eeee,
that would make him very difficult to fight. I only
ordered two hundred and fifty--where is he
getting the money, his lands are almost as debt-ridden
as mine ... ah yes, I forgot, bartering mining
concessions. Clever. I will do the same. What is
his secret plan? Does he have a "Crimson
Sky" too? If Yoshi gets five thousand
I must get ten. Tonight he brought forty men. Why
forty? Was that to remind me I agreed to forty at
each Gate? Forty riflemen could
easily decimate my two hundred unless
equally armed.
  "You have more here?" he asked.
  Yoshi decided to be open. "Not at the
moment."
  Thoughtfully Ogama handed the rifle back and
turned his attention to the hovels.
  The sounds of the battle were lessening, those of the
fires increasing, more and more inhabitants trying
to douse them in lines passing water buckets.
Roofs of the target hut and those each side were
burning now. There was another desperate
hand-to-hand combat as more shishi left the burning
hovel, many already wounded. Yoshi said,
"Katsumata's not amongst them."
  "Perhaps he tried to break out from the back."
  There, out of their sight, five shishi were already
dead in the dirt together with eight Ogama
samurai, and six wounded. Another battle between
three shishi and ten Ogama samurai was drawing
to its inevitable conclusion. A final shout of
"sonno-joi" and the three men rushed to their deaths.
Thirty Choshu samurai were arranged in depth
waiting for the next breakout. Smoke billowed from
rips in the shojis. Stench of burning flesh was on
the air. No movement from inside. An officer
motioned to one of the samurai. "Report to the
Captain what occurred here and ask him, do we
wait or go in?"
  The man ran off.
  In front, the skirmish ended as all the others
had done. The three shishi died bravely.
Twelve more of them dead here, seventeen Choshu
Samurai and one of Yoshi's men scattered in
heaps. Fourteen wounded, three shishi helpless,
disarmed and still alive. The Captain listened to the
report. "Tell the officer to wait and kill
anyone we flush out." He called out to a group
held in reserve. "Empty the huts while there
is time. Kill anyone who will not surrender but not
the wounded."
  At once the men went for the door. Inside there
were brief shouts and countershouts and then silence.
One of the men came out again, blood pouring from a
vicious cut in his thigh. "Half a dozen
wounded, many bodies."
  "Bring them out before the roof falls in!"
  The bodies, and wounded, were lined up in front
of Yoshi and Ogama, the officials nearby.
Torches cast strange shadows.
Twenty-nine dead. Eleven helplessly wounded.
Katsumata was not amongst them.
  "Where is he?" Ogama shouted at the chief
official, enraged, Yoshi equally angry, no
one knowing exactly how many enemy were within when the
battle had begun.
  The man went to his knees. "Sire, I
swear he was there earlier and he never left."
  Ogama stomped over to the nearest wounded shishi.
"Where is he?"
  The man glared at him through his pain. "Who?"
  "Katsumata! Katsumata!"
  "Who? I know no ... no Katsumata.
Sonno-joi, traitor! Kill me and have done
with it."
  "Soon enough," Ogama said through his teeth.
  Each of the wounded was questioned. Ogama had looked
into every face--no Katsumata. Or Takeda.
"Kill them all."
  "Let them die honorably, as samurai,"
Yoshi said.
  "Of course." They both looked back as the
roof of the hut fell in and the walls collapsed in
a shower of sparks, carrying the adjoining hovels with
it. The drizzle turned to rain again. "Captain!
Put the fire out. There must be a cellar, a
hiding place, if this piece of dung is not an
incompetent fool." Ogama strode off, in
total rage, believing somehow he had been
cheated.
  Nervously the chief official got off his
knees and sidled nearer to Yoshi. "Excuse
me, Sire," he whispered, "but the woman's not
here either. There must be a h--"
  "What woman?"
  "She was young. A Satsuma. She has been
with them for some weeks. We believe she was
Katsumata's companion. I am sorry to say
Takeda is not there either."
  "Who?"
  "A Choshu shishi we have been watching. Perhaps
he was Ogama's spy--he was seen sneaking
into Ogama's headquarters the day before our other
attack on Katsumata failed."
  "For certain Katsumata was in there and the other
two?"
  "Certain, Sire. All three, Sire."
  "Then there is a cellar or secret escape
route."
  They found it in the dawn. A
trapdoor over a narrow tunnel, just enough to crawl
through that ended well away in a weed-covered garden
of an empty shack. Furiously Ogama
kicked the camouflaged cover. "Baka!"
  "We will put a price on Katsumata's
head. A special price," Yoshi said. He
was as angry. Obviously the failure had
bruised the relationship so agonizingly
manipulated and begun. But he was too shrewd
to mention Takeda, or about the woman--she had no
significance. "Katsumata must still be in
Ky@oto. The Bakufu will be ordered to find him,
capture him or bring us his head."
  "My adherents will be ordered the same."
Ogama was a little mollified. He also had been
thinking about Takeda, wondering if his escape
boded good or bad. He glanced at the Captain
who had walked up. "Yes?"
  "You wish to view the heads now, sire?"
  "Yes. Yoshi-dono?"
  "Yes."
  The wounded shishi were allowed to die honorably
without further pain. They were ritually
decapitated, their heads washed and were now in a
formal row. Forty. Again that number, Ogama thought
uneasily. Is that an omen? Nonetheless he hid
his disquiet, recognizing none of them.
  "I have seen them," he said formally, the dawn
misted with the light rain.
  "I have seen them," Yoshi said equally
gravely.
  "Put the heads on spikes, twenty outside
my gates, and twenty outside Lord Yoshi's."
  "And the sign, Sire?" the Captain asked.
  "Yoshi-dono, what do you suggest?"
  After a pause, knowing he was being tried again,
Yoshi said, "The two signs could read: These
outlaws, ronin, were punished for crimes against the
Emperor. Let all beware misdeeds. Is that
satisfactory?"
  "Yes. And the signature?" Both of them
knew this was highly important and difficult
to solve. If Ogama signed it alone, that
implied he was legally master of the Gates; if
Yoshi, that would imply Ogama was subservient
to him, legally true but out of the question. A Bakufu
seal implied the same. A Court seal would be
undue meddling in temporal matters.
  "Perhaps we give these fools too much
importance," Yoshi said, pretending
contempt. His eyes narrowed as, over Ogama's
shoulder he saw Basuhiro and some guards come
around the far corner of the mean, puddled alley at
a run. He looked back at Ogama. "Why
not just put their heads on spikes here? Why give
them the honor of a sign? Those who we want to know
will know soon enough--and be chastened. Neh?"
  Ogama was pleased with the diplomatic solution.
"Excellent. I agree. Let us meet at
dusk an--" He stopped as he noticed
Basuhiro hurrying up to them, sweating and out of
breath. He went to meet him.
  "Courier from Shimonoseki, Sire,"
Basuhiro panted.
  Ogama's face became a mask. He took
the scroll and moved nearer to one of the torches.
All eyes were on him as he opened
it--Basuhiro politely holding an
umbrella over him.
  The message was from the Captain commanding the
Straits and dated eight days ago, couriered
express, day and night, as highest priority:

Sire, yesterday the returning enemy fleet
consisting of the flagship and seven other warships,
all steamers, some towing coaling barges, entered the
Straits. Following your instructions that we should not
engage enemy warships without your written orders
we let them pass. We could have sunk all of
them. Our Dutch advisors confirm this.
  When the armada had passed, a steamer
frigate flying a French flag arrogantly
returned and fired broadside after broadside
into four emplacements on the east end of the
Straits destroying them and their cannon, then
steamed away. Again I refrained from retaliating
in accordance with your orders. If attacked in
future I request permission to sink the
attacker.

  Death to all gai-jin, Ogama wanted
to scream, blind with rage that a whole fleet had
been within his grasp, like Katsumata, but had
escaped vengeance--like Katsumata. Flecks of
foam collected at the corners of his lips.
"Prepare new instructions: Engage and destroy
any and all enemy warships."
  Basuhiro, still trying to catch his breath, said,
"May I suggest, Sire, you consider "if more
than four at any one time." You have
always wanted to maintain surprise."
  Ogama wiped his mouth and nodded, his heart
pumping at the thought of so many ships he could have
destroyed. The rain had increased and was drumming
on the umbrella. Beyond Basuhiro he saw
Yoshi and the other officers waiting, watching him, and
he weighed whether to treat Yoshi as enemy or
ally, the implications of the fleet, the arrogance,
and his own impotence swamping him.
"Yoshi-dono!" He beckoned him and, with
Basuhiro, moved further into private. "Read
it, please."
  Yoshi read rapidly. In spite of his
control the color left his face. "Is the
fleet heading up the inland sea for Osaka? Or
will they turn south for Yokohama?"
  "South or not, the next warships in my waters
get blown out of my waters! Basuhiro, send
men at once to Osaka an--"
  "Wait, Ogama-dono," Yoshi said quickly,
wanting time to think. "Basuhiro, what is your
council?"
  The little man said at once, "Sire, for the
moment presume it is Osaka and we should, together,
prepare at once to defend it. I have already sent
spies urgently to discover the fleet's course as
best I can."
  "Good." Ogama shakily wiped rain out of his
face. "Their whole fleet in my Straits ...
I should have been there."
  Basuhiro said, "It is more important for you
to guard the Emperor against his enemies, Sire, and
your commander was correct not to fire on the single
ship. Surely it was a decoy to smell out your
strength. He was right not to give away your
defenses. Now the trap is baited should you wish
to close it. Because only one enemy warship sneaked
back and bombarded some easy positions and left
hastily, I surmise their fleet commander was
afraid, was not prepared to attack or land
troops to start the war that we will end."
  "Yes we will. A ruse? I agree.
Yoshi-dono," Ogama said with finality, "we
should have done with it and start the war. A surprise
attack on Yokohama, if they land at
Osaka or not."
  Yoshi could not answer at once, almost sick
with a sudden apprehension that he tried to hide.
Eight warships? That's four more than sailed
to China so the gai-jin have reinforced their
fleet. Why? To retaliate for the Satsuma
murders, but more particularly, Ogama's
attacks on their shipping. And they will do it as in
China. The gai-jin ship was sunk in the Taiwan
Straits, but they decimated China's coast
hundreds of leagues away.
  What is their easiest target in Nippon?
Yedo.
  Has Ogama realized this and his secret plan
is just to provoke the gai-jin? If I was the
gai-jin leader I would destroy Yedo. They do not
know it but Yedo is indivisible from our
Sh@ogunate. If Yedo ends, the Toranaga
Sh@ogunate ends and then the Land of the Gods is
open to rape.
  Therefore this will be prevented at all costs.
  Think! How to bottle the gai-jin, and Ogama
whose answer is to put our heads on their block--
not his. "I agree with your wise counselor,
we should prepare to defend Osaka," he began,
his stomach churning. Then his anxiety for the safety
of Yedo bubbled over. "Whether Osaka now or
later, a war fleet has returned. Unless we
are very careful war is inevitable."
  "Enough of being careful." Ogama leaned
closer. "I say whether there's landing at Osaka
or not, we excise the boil on our balls and
exterminate Yokohama. Now! If you will not, so
sorry, I will."




















            BOOK THREE

                 

              YOKOHAMA

    Saturday, 29th November:
  "We passed the fleet two days back,
Mr. Malcolm, Jamie," the clipper
captain said genially, hiding his shock at the
change in Malcolm whom he had known since
birth and had laughed and drank with barely three
months ago in Hong Kong--the drawn sallow
features, strange haunted eyes, the sticks
he needed to walk or even to stand with. "We were under
full sail with a Force Six aft and going like the
clappers, they were riding it leisurely, wise,
for they surely wouldn't want to lose any of the
coaling barges they towed."
  His name was Sheeling and he had just come ashore from
his ship, Dancing Cloud, her arrival
unexpected. He was forty-two, a tall,
bearded, weatherbeaten man, twenty-eight years
with the Noble House. "We just saluted them and kept
going."
  "Tea, Captain?" McFay asked,
automatically pouring, knowing from long experience this
was his preferred drink. During a voyage he
always drank it ladened with sugar and condensed milk,
day or night. They were in Malcolm's suite
at the big table and like the tai-pan, Jamie was
hardly listening, his eyes also on the sealed mail
pouch, embossed with the Noble House crest, under
Sheeling's left arm.
  Instead of a left hand Sheeling had a hook.
When he was a midshipman on an voyage along
the Yangtze River trading opium, pirates
of the White Lotus fleet had surrounded their
lorcha and in the fight his hand had been cut off.
Afterwards he had been commended for his gallantry.
His beloved idol, Dirk Struan, had brought
him back from the brink, then put him with the fleet's
chief captain, Orlov the Hunchback, with
orders to teach him all he knew.
  "Ta'," Sheeling said with a smile, and took a
large swallow. "Excellent, Jamie! Of
course I'd prefer a large whisky as you know but
that'll have to wait until Honolulu--I plan
leave right smartly, just came t--"
  "Honolulu?" Struan and Jamie said, almost
in the same breath. This was not a normal
call for their clippers racing across the Pacific
for San Francisco then to hurry back again.
  "What's your cargo?" Malcolm said, almost
adding "Uncle Sheeley" the name he had used
in the good days of his youth.
  "The usual, tea and spices for 'Frisco,
but I've orders to first deliver mail to our
agents in Hawaii."
  "Mother's orders?"
  Sheeling nodded and his grey eyes looked back
at him pleasantly. He had heard the
undercurrent and knew part of the problem existing between
mother and son--Malcolm's engagement and her
opposition the private talk of Hong Kong--but
was under strict instructions not to mention it.
  "How is business there, in Hawaii?"
Malcolm asked, a new shaft of anxiety
going through him. "Did she say?"
  "No, Mrs. Struan just ordered me to stop
there."
  A gust rattled the office shutters. They
glanced out of the window. In the bay the three,
rake-masted clipper was at anchor, taking the
swell prettily, her sails ready to be
hoisted again, soon to hurtle seawards and ride the
wild winds or good winds or bad, whatever that
lay ahead. The three men were filled like sails with
pride and Sheeling felt warmed that he ruled such
a queen of the sea. He turned his attention back
to Malcolm and absently scratched an itch on
his neck with his hook. "I was ordered here for the
same reason: mail!" He gave him the pouch.
"May I have a receipt please."
  "Of course." Malcolm nodded to Jamie who
began to write it out. "What's the latest from
Hong Kong?"
  "I'd say most would be in the pouch, but I've
brought the latest papers, both Hong Kong's and
London's--I left the bundle in your office
downstairs." Sheeling gulped the tea, anxious
to be on his way. This would be his fourth Hawaiian
visit over the years and he knew the beauty of
their girls and their rare, joy-filled loving
nature, money hardly a consideration, so unlike
Hong Kong, Shanghai or anywhere else he
had ever been. This time I'll buy some land,
secretly. Different name. It's Hawaii for
me next year when I retire, that's where I'm
going and no one any the wiser. The thought of sailing
off for good, of leaving his wife, an
accomplished nag, and rapacious children in
London, Daddy buy me this, Daddy buy me
that--not that he saw them often--pleased him.
  "I meant local news in Hong Kong,"
Struan was saying.
  "Oh. Well, first your family's in fine
fettle, Mrs. Struan, your brother and sisters
though young Duncan had another bad cold when I
left. As to Hong Kong, the races are as good as
ever, so's the food, Mrs. Fortheringill's is still
booming in spite of a recession, the Noble House
stays on course as you'd know better than me,
along with the usual rumors that all's not well,
probably spread by the Brocks, but that's just more
of the usual and never changes." He got up.
"Thank you kindly, I best be going, must catch
the tide."
  "Won't you at least stay for lunch?"
  "No, thanks, I'd better be off an--"
  "What rumors?" Malcolm said harshly.
  "Nothing worth repeating, Mr. Malcolm."
  "Why don't you call me "tai-pan" like
everyone else?" Malcolm said irritably,
fear of what might be in the pouch eating him. "I
am, aren't I?"
  Sheeling's expression did not change, he
liked him and admired him and was sorry for the burden
he now carried. "Yes you are, and you're right,
it's time I stopped "Mr. Malcolm." But,
begging your pardon, your father said exactly the same
to me after he became tai-pan, a few days after
the typhoon killed the ... killed the tai-pan,
Mr. Dirk. As you know he was very special
to me, and I asked my captain, Captain
Orlov, if I could talk to Mr. Culum and
he said it was all right. So I said to your father that
I'd always called Mr. Dirk tai-pan and as
a special favor, could I just call him sir,
or Mr. Struan. He said I could. It was a
special favor. Could th--"
  "I'm told Captain Orlov called my
father "tai-pan," and my grandfather was just as
special to him, perhaps more so."
  "That's true," the captain said, standing
straight. "When Captain Orlov disappeared,
your father put me in charge of the fleet. I've
served your father with all my heart, as I will you, and
your son if I live that long. As a special
favor, please, could it be the same as with your
father?"
  Sheeling was more than valuable to the Noble House.
All three men knew it. And his inflexibility.
Malcolm nodded, hurt even so. "Have a safe
voyage, Captain."
  "Thank you, sir. And ... and good luck,
Mr. Struan, in everything. And you, Jamie."
As he strode for the door Malcolm broke the
first seal on the pouch, but before the Captain touched the
handle, the door opened. Angelique stood there.
Bonnet, navy blue dress, gloves, and
parasol. All three men caught their breath at
her radiance.
  "Oh sorry, ch@eri, I didn't know you
were busy ..."
  "That's all right, come in." Malcolm had
clambered to his feet. "May I present
Captain Sheeling, of Dancing Cloud."
  "La, Monsieur, what a gorgeous ship,
how lucky you are."
  "Yes, yes I am, Miss. Thank you,"
Sheeling said, smiling back. By God, he thought,
never having seen her before, who could blame
Malcolm? "'morning, Miss." He saluted
and left, not wishing to leave now, not for a little while.
  "So sorry to interrupt, Malcolm, but you said
to collect you for lunch, it's to be with Sir
William--and you haven't forgotten I have a
piano lesson this afternoon with Andr`e and I've
arranged for us to have our daguerreotype taken at
five. Hello Jamie!"
  "Our picture?"
  "Yes, you remember the funny Italian who
arrived on the last mail ship from Hong Kong for a
season, he makes them, he guarantees we will
look very handsome!"
  Most of Malcolm's concern had left him and
he felt all of her presence, doting on her,
even though he had seen her an hour ago--coffee
in his suite at eleven, a habit she had
instituted and he enjoyed immensely. Over the
last two or three weeks her loving disposition
seemed to him to have blossomed even more though she
spent much of her time riding, or at archery, or
piano lessons, or planning soirees, and at
her journal and letter writing--a way of life for
all of them. But every moment she was with him she was as
attentive and tender as any woman could be. His
love and his need for her grew daily, overwhelming
him with its power.
  "Lunch is at one, darling, it's just
after twelve," he said, and as much as he didn't
want her to leave added, "Will you give us a few
minutes?"
  "Of course." With her grace, she seemed
to dance over to him and kissed him and went to her
suite next door. Her perfume lingered as a
delicious memory.
  His fingers trembled, breaking the last seal.
Inside were three letters. Two from his mother, one for
him, one for Jamie. The third letter was from
Gordon Chen, their compradore and his uncle.
"Here," he said, handing Jamie his letter, his heart
beating furiously, wishing that Sheeling had not
arrived. His two letters were burning his fingers.
  "I'll leave you to it," Jamie said.
  "No. Bad news need company." Malcolm
looked up. "Open yours." Jamie obeyed and
read rapidly. His face became red.
  "Is it private, Jamie?"
  "It says: "Dear Jamie"--that's the first
time she's used the old way of writing me for a
long time--"you may show this to my son, if you
wish. I'm sending Albert MacStruan as
soon as I can arrange it from our Shanghai
office. You are to make him your deputy and teach
him all you can about our entire Japanese
operation, so that, unless two things happen, he can
adequately take over from you when you leave
Struan's. The first is that my son is in Hong
Kong by Christmas. The second is that you
accompany him."" Jamie stared at him
helplessly. "That's it. Just a signature."
  "That's not it," Malcolm said, his own face
hot. "As soon as Albert arrives he can
bloody go back."
  "No harm in him staying a few days and letting
him look over the place. He's a good
fellow."
  "Mother's ... I never thought she could be so
cruel: if I don't obey and kowtow, you get
fired. Eh?" Malcolm's eyes strayed to his
bureau. For the last few weeks he had made the
immense effort to restrict his intake to once a
day. Some days he had failed. "Laudanum in
moderation, Malcolm," Dr. Babcott had
said, "is a panacea for pain." He had
insisted that Malcolm show him the medicine, not
to take it away, just to check its contents. "This
is fairly strong. Remember, it's not a cure
and with some people it is addictive."
  "Not with me. I need it for the pain. You stop the
pain and I'll stop the medicine."
  "Sorry, my friend, wish I could. Your
internal organs were badly damaged, not too
badly, thank God, but even so will take time
to heal."
  Too much time, Malcolm was thinking, is it
worse than Babcott will admit? He looked
at two letters reluctant to open them. Filthy of
her to use Jamie as another cudgel.
"Rotten."
  "She has certain rights," Jamie said.
  "She's not tai-pan, I am. Father's will was
clear." Malcolm's voice was dull, his thoughts
untidy. "Guess old Uncle Sheeley was
right, you have to earn that title, don't you?"
  "You're tai-pan." It was said kindly though
Jamie knew it was not true. "Strange he should
bring up Orlov, haven't thought about him in
years. Wonder what happened to him."
  "Yes," Malcolm said absently. "Poor
fellow was a marked man after he blew Wu
Sung Choi's Number One Son out of the
water. Orlov was stupid to go ashore alone in
Macao. He must have been snatched by the White
Lotus pirates. Macao's a deadly
place, easy to go into China, and everywhere the White
Lotus has spies. I'd hate to be on their
marked list ..." His voice trailed away.
He looked down at the letters, lost in thought.
  Jamie waited. Then he said, "Give me a
shout if I can help. I'll be going through the rest
of the mail." He left.
  Malcolm did not hear the door close. There
was the "I love you" postscript to his mother's
letter, so no secret message:

My dearest but prodigal son, I had
planned to arrive with Dancing Cloud but
decided against it at the last minute as Duncan
was poorly and has the croup again. Perhaps what I
have to say is better in writing then there can be no
mistake.
  I've received your ill advised letters about
what you will and will not do, about your "engagement,"
Jamie McFay, Miss Richaud etc.--and
about the five thousand rifles. I immediately wrote
and cancelled the extravagant order.
  The time has come for open decisions. Since
you are not here and will not do as I ask, I
will make them. For your private knowledge it is my
right to do so.
  When your father was dying, poor man, there was
no time to wait for your return so, almost with his
last breath, he made me de facto tai-pan
according to all the provisions in Dirk's Will and
Legacy--some of them terrible--all of which have to be
accepted, before God, sight unseen and must be
kept secret from tai-pan to tai-pan. At the
time it was our expectation that I would pass the
mantle to you on your immediate return. One of
Dirk's Laws lays down: It is the duty
of the tai-pan to swear absolute belief in the
integrity of his successor. I cannot do this for you at
the moment. All this, and the following, is again for your
private knowledge--it would hurt Struan's for it to be
made public, so destroy the letter after reading it.
  By today's mail to Scotland, I have offered the
post of tai-pan to your cousin Lochlin
Struan, Uncle Robb's son, with four
provisos: first that he comes at once to Hong
Kong and spends three months in training here--as
you know he is well versed in our company
operations, better than you as far as Great
Britain is concerned, though you are far and away
better fitted and better trained; second, he
agrees to keep this all secret; third, at the
end of the trial period, before God, I will make
the final choice between the two of you, my decision of
course to be binding; fourth, that if you come to your
senses, he agrees that I must choose you but he
will be next, should you fail to have sons, Duncan
to be after him.
  Coming to your senses, my son, means
returning to Hong Kong at once, the very latest
by Christmas Day, alone but for Jamie McFay
(and Dr. Hoag, should you wish to have his company)
to discuss your future plans, to take up
pressing duties and prepare for the position you have
trained all your life for. Should you prove to be
satisfactory, I will make you tai-pan on
your twenty-first birthday, May 21/.
  I have shown this to Gordon Chen and asked him
to comment where necessary--our compradore must, MUST,
by Dirk's Law, be a party to the handing over of
power. yr devoted mother. P.s. I love you
and an added P.p.s.: Thank you for your news
from Parliament about more of their usual stupidity
(via the curious channel of our archenemy
Greyforth. Beware of him, he's up
to no good but then you know that better than I). Yes
we had heard the rumours, the Governor still
denies any knowledge. I had already written to our
Parliamentarians on the first rumour telling them
to stop the nonsense if it was true, and to Bengal
forewarning them. In response to your letter I have
written again. It really is time you came home
to apply yourself to your duty and our mounting
problems.

  "Duty!" Malcolm shouted at the wall,
balled the letter and hurled it at it, hurting himself with
his violence. He stumbled to his feet, lurched
to his bureau. The little bottle contained his evening
dose. He drained it, smashed it on the oak
top cursing, and almost fell as he groped to his
chair.
  "She can't! Can't! That ... that bitch can't do
that ... can't! "Go back alone" only means
without Angel Histo discuss" ... I won't and
she won't interfere ..." and he continued to half
think and half speak imprecations until the
opiate entered his bloodstream and began its
deadly solace.
  In time he noticed the other letter from Compradore
Gordon Chen--his father's stepbrother, one of
many illegitimate children sired by Dirk Struan.
"Three that we know about," he said aloud.

  My dear dear nephew: I've already
written how sorry I was about your bad joss, the
wounds and accident. I'm even more sorry to hear
there is an estrangement between you and your mother that
promises to become dangerous and could disrupt our
Noble House--therefore it is my duty to comment and
advise. She showed me her letter to you. I have not
shown mine to her, nor will I. In mine I will
confine myself only to the position of tai-pan, other
than to give you my very private advice about the
girl: be Chinese.
  Facts: though you are formally my
stepbrother's heir, your mother correctly says
you have not undergone the obligatory ceremony,
attestations, oaths and signatures laid down in
my Honourable Father's Will and Legacy that are
necessary before you can be tai-pan, which, to be valid, must
be witnessed personally and attested to in writing as
properly executed by the current compradore, who
must be of my branch of the House of Chen. Only
then is the chosen one the tai-pan.
  Before your father died he did in fact appoint
your mother tai-pan. It was correctly done in
all details. I witnessed it. She is
tai-pan legally and has power over the Noble
House. It is true that your father and mother expected
the position to be passed over to you quickly, but she
is also correct that one of the tai-pan's
obligations is to attest before God to the integrity
of his successor, and also true the Noble House
is governed only by what the tai-pan, he, or
she, decides, particularly the choice and timing
of any succession.
  My only advice is: be wise, swallow
your pride, return at once, kowtow, kowtow and
kowtow, accept a "trial" period, become
again a dutiful son, honouring your ancestors,
for the good of the House. Obey the tai-pan. Be
Chinese.

  Malcolm Struan stared at the letter, his
future in ruins, past in ruins, everything
changed. So she is tai-pan! Mother is! If
Uncle Gordon says it then it's true!
She's cheated me out of my birthright, she has,
my Mother has.
  But isn't that really what she's wanted all the
years? Didn't she always cajole, beg, whine,
plot do whatever was necessary to dominate father, me and
all of us. Her maddening family prayers every day
and church twice on Sunday, us trailing along
when once on Sundays is more than enough. And
drinking! "Drunkenness is an abomination" and
quoting the Bible all day long to the point of
insanity, no fun in our lives, Lent observed
to the letter, fasting, forever carping on the brilliance of
Dirk Struan, God curse him, always saying
how terrible to have died so young--never bringing up that he
died in the typhoon with his Chinese mistress in his
arms, a fact that was and still is the scandal of Asia
--always sermonizing on the evils of the flesh,
Father's weakness, the death of my sister and the twins
...
  Suddenly he sat up solidly in his
high-back chair. Insanity? That's it! he
thought. Could I put her in an insane asylum?
Maybe she is. Would Uncle Gordon help
me to ... Ayeeyah! It's me who's mad.
It's me who's ...
  "Malcolm! It's lunch time."
  He looked up and saw himself talking
to Angelique, saying how pretty she was but would
she mind very much going without him as a few serious
things had to be decided, letters to be written--no,
nothing that affected her, no really, just a few
business problems--all the time remembering
"return alone" and "kowtow, she's
tai-pan" grinding into his head. "Please,
Angelique."
  "Of course, if that's what you want, but you're
sure you're all right, my love? You don't have
a fever do you?"
  He allowed her to feel his forehead and caught
her hand and pulled her into his lap and kissed her
and she kissed him back and laughed gaily and
straightened her bodice saying she would be back
after her piano lesson and not to worry and for the
picture he must wear his evening clothes and oh
you'll be so impressed with my new ball gown.
  And then he was alone with his thoughts again, the same
words grinding his brain: "return alone ...
She's tai-pan." How dare she cancel the
order for rifles--what does she know about this
market?
  Tai-pan legally. So she really does rule
the roost, and me. Certainly until I'm
twenty-one and ever afterwards. Until she's not.
Until ...
  Ah, is that the key? Is that what Uncle
Gordon meant when he wrote: .be Chinese.
Be Chinese how? Just be patient? How would a
Chinese handle my whole predicament?
  Just before he went into his special sleep, he
smiled.

  As it was Saturday and a pleasant afternoon a
football match had been arranged on the
bluff. Most of the Settlement was watching andwiththe
usual fights and hysteria, on and off the pitch,
when one side or the other scored a goal, Army
versus Navy, fifty men per side. The
score was Navy 1, Army 2, and the first half
not yet over. Hacking permitted, brawling
permitted, almost everything permitted and the only
purpose to force the ball through the opposing posts.
  Angelique, seated on the halfway line with
Sir William and the General, was surrounded by the
rest of his lunch guests--Seratard and other
Ministers, Andr`e and Phillip Tyrer--who had
decided to come en masse to watch. Crowding them and
vying for her attention were British and
French officers, Settry Pallidar and
Marlowe, the only British naval officer,
amongst them--Jamie nearby. When she had
hurried back to Malcolm to tell him she was
cancelling her piano lesson, which was another
excuse not to have to sit with him, and to ask him if he
would like to go to the game, he was still asleep. So she
had asked Jamie to escort her.
  "Yes, best to let him sleep--I'll
leave him a note," Jamie had said,
welcoming any excuse to distract him from looming
disaster. "Pity he won't see the match,
Malcolm was a sports enthusiast, as you know, a
grand swimmer, a fine cricketer as well,
tennis of course. Sad that he's, well, not his
old self."
  She could see that he was as gloomy as
Malcolm but that did not matter, she thought, men were
generally serious and she was pleased to have company as a
foil against the others. Since the great day when that which
was growing had ceased to be, and her health and vigor
had returned, better than ever, she had found it
unwise to be alone with any of them. Except
Andr`e. To her delight he had changed, no
longer threatening or referring to the help he had
given her, all of it she would like to forget, no
longer looking at her with rough and heavy-lidded
eyes, too easy to read the cruelty behind them,
though sure the cruelty still lurked within him.
  Important to keep him friendly, she thought,
aware how vulnerable she was. Listen but beware.
Some of what he says is good: "Forget what
happened before, it never happened."
  Andr`e's right. Nothing happened. Nothing,
except he's dead. I really do love
Malcolm, I'll bear him sons and be the
perfect wife and hostess and our salon in
Paris will be ...
  A roar distracted her. A mob of Navy
players had forced the ball between the Army posts but
the Army fought the ball away and now a general
riot began, the Navy claiming a goal, the
Army disputing it. Dozens of seamen swarmed on
to the pitch to join the melee, then soldiers and
soon there was a free-for-all, traders and others
cheering and laughing and enjoying the spectacle, the
referee, Lunkchurch, desperately trying
to stay out of the fight and, meanwhile, get some order
back on the field.
  "Oh, look ... that poor
fellow's being kicked to death!"
  "Nothing to worry about, Angelique, just
horseplay, clearly it wasn't a goal," the
General said confidently. The man was Navy so of
little concern. Sir William, the other side of
her, was as excited as any, nothing like a good
brawl to lighten the spirits. Nonetheless, conscious of
Angelique, he leaned over to the General.
"Think we should get on with the game, Thomas,
eh?"
  "Quite right." The General motioned to Pallidar.
"Break it up if you please--reason with them."
  Pallidar of the Dragoons went onto the
pitch, took out his revolver and fired a salvo
into the air. Everyone froze. "Listen, you lot,"
he called out, all eyes on him now, "Everyone
off the pitch except the players. The General's
order: another riot and the match is cancelled and
those involved will be disciplined. Move!" The
field began to clear, many hobbling, the injured
dragged off by supporters. "Now, Mr.
Referee, was it a goal or not?"
  "Well, Captain, yes and no, you see
..."
  "Was it or not?"
  The silence was strong. Lunkchurch knew
whatever he said was going to be wrong. He decided
the truth was best: "A goal for the Navy!"
  Amid cheers and countercheers, threats and
counterthreats, Pallidar walked back, tall and
very pleased with himself. "Oh, Settry, what
bravery!" Angelique spoke with such
appreciation that Marlowe and others were riven with
jealousy. "Good work, old boy," Marlowe said
reluctantly as the game--the fight--began in
earnest to cheers drowned by the boos and curses.
  "Jolly good game, Thomas, what?" Sir
William said.
  "Clearly that wasn't a goal, the
Referee's a--"
  "Poppycock! Five guineas says the
Navy will win."
  The General's neck had gone a darker shade
of red and this pleased Sir William and helped
to get him out of his ill humor. Nothing but
quarrels in the Settlement and Drunk Town,
irritating letters and complaints from the Bakufu and
Customs House, and he had not forgotten the
General's stupidity at the riot.
  Added to these woes, the last mails
had brought more foul news and forecasts from the Foreign
Office that lack of financial support in
Parliament would herald major cutbacks of
Diplomatic personnel "even though the coffers
of the Empire are overflowing, there will be no salary
increases this year. The American war promises
to be the most savage in history because of the newly
invented shell, bronze cartridge,
breech-loading rifle, machine gun and
breech-loading cannon; with the defeat of Union
forces at Shiloh and the Second Battle of
Bull Run the war is presently expected
to be won by the Confederates, most pundits in the
City having written off President Lincoln
as weak and ineffectual, but, dear Willie,
H.m.'s policy remains the same: to back
both sides, keep our heads down and stay
to hell out of this one ..."
  European news was also bad: Russian
Cossack troops had again massacred thousands of
Poles in Warsaw demonstrating against
Russian rule; Prince von Bismarck had
been made Minister President of Prussia and
was rumored to be preparing for war against expansionist
France; Austria-Hungary and Russia
appeared to be on the verge of war again;
inevitably more fighting in the Balkans ...
  And so on, ad nauseam, Sir William
thought with a scowl. Nothing changes! And I'm
damned if I believe the Bakufu will do what
they've promised which means I will have to show the
Flag here. I'll have to teach the Japanners that a
promise is a promise if it's made to the
British Raj, by God, and to remind
Zergeyev, Seratard and others the same thing.
  Bombard Yedo would be the simplest and easiest
solution, that'd bring them to heel quick enough. But then
there's Ketterer--perhaps his foray into history books
will have changed him. Ugh! What a hope ...
  "A rouble for your thoughts, Sir William,"
Count Zergeyev, said with a smile, offering a
silver flask embossed with his family crest in
gold. "Vodka is good for thoughts."
  "Thanks." Sir William took a
swallow and felt the fire slide down his
gullet, reminding him of all the wonderful times
at the Embassy in St. Petersburg when he was
in his twenties, a center of power, not an outpost
like Yokohama, drinking and carousing, balls and
ballet and dachas, night life and
luxury--for the few--excitement and intrigues and
marvelous dinners and Vertinskya, never far from his
thoughts.
  For five of his seven years there she had been his
mistress, youngest daughter of a favored
goldsmith to the Court, an artist like her father, her
father benign about their liaison, William's own
Russian mother doting on the girl and wanting him
to marry her. "Sorry, Mama dear, no chance
of that at all, much as I'd like it, the Service
would never approve. It's Sir Roger's
daughter Daphne. Sorry ..."
  He drank again, the misery of their parting still with
him. "I was thinking about Vertinskya," he said in
Russian.
  "Ah! Yes, the girls of Mother Russia are
very special," Zergeyev replied
compassionately in the same language. "Their
love, if you are so blessed, is forever and then forever
again." The affair had been smiled at in
diplomatic circles and well documented by the
Cheka, the Tsar's secret police, therefore part
of Sir William's dossier that of course
Zergeyev had read. Stupid of the girl to kill
herself, he thought, never quite sure if William was
aware of her suicide shortly after he had
returned to London. That was never part of the plan,
nor his duty to tell him. Why did she do it?
Over this boor? Surely that's not possible, but for
whatever reason, a pity, her usefulness, to both of
us, would have lasted for many more years. "Perhaps your
Foreign Office will post you there again--there are other
Vertinskyas."
  "Not much chance of that I'm afraid."
  "Let's hope. Another hope, mon
ami, that your Lord Palmerston will see the logic
that we should have the Kuriles. Like the Dardanelles
--both should surely be Russian."
  Sir William saw the glitter in his
strange sloe eyes. "Not much chance of that I'm
afraid."
  The half-time whistle sounded, the score still two
all, to be swallowed by a roar of recriminations and
praises and promises of dire punishment for the
losers. At once Marlowe moved over
to Jamie. "Do you think Mr. Struan and, er, and
Miss Angelique would like to join me aboard
Pearl for tiffin and a day's sail?" he asked,
simulating a sudden thought. "Have to do some trials,
soon as the fleet's back and I'd be
glad to have them aboard."
  "I think they'd enjoy it, why don't you ask
him?"
  "When would be a good time?"
  "Any day around eleven--or just before dinner."
  "Thanks, thanks very much." Marlowe beamed,
then noticed Jamie's pallor. "Oh, are you
all right?"
  "Yes, thanks." Jamie forced a smile and
moved away.
  He had been considering his future. Some
weeks ago he had written to Maureen Ross,
his fianc@ee, in Scotland, telling her to wait
no longer for him--almost three years since he had
last seen her, five years engaged--that he was
sorry, he knew he had been abominable to keep
her waiting so long but he was absolutely, finally
convinced the East was positively no place for a
lady, and equally certain Asia was his home,
Yokohama, Hong Kong, Shanghai, anywhere
but there, and he had no intention of leaving. Yes,
he knew he had been unfair to her but their
engagement was at an end. This was to be his last letter.
  For days he had felt nauseated, before he
wrote it, after having written it and after he had
seen the mail ship put to sea. But he was sure.
That chapter was ended. And now the Struan chapter that
was so rosy, promotion next year for certain, will
also end. God Almighty! No way Malcolm
will go back, so I've only a few more weeks
to decide what to do--and don't forget Norbert will
be back before then. Then what? Will they really
duel? If they do that's joss but you've still got
to protect Malcolm as best you can.
  So a new job! Where? I'd like to stay here,
there's Nemi, it's a good life with a wide-open
future to build. Hong Kong and Shanghai are
mostly built, the "Old Boy" structure
strong in place--great if you're a Struan or
Brock or Cooper and so on but difficult
to break through.
  First choice would be here. With whom? With
Dmitri in Cooper-Tillman? Could they use
me? Yes but not as top man. Brock's? Oh
yes, I considered that in the depths of her
unfairness, but no chance of top man with Norbert
--but if Malcolm killed him what a coup that
would be, what revenge! Lunkchurch? Yes,
definitely, but who'd want to work for that uncouth
bugger? What about on your own? That'd be
best, but the riskiest and who'd sponsor you?
I'd need money, I've some put away but not
enough. I'd need lots to begin, lots to cover the
time agrowing, for letters of credit and insurances, time
to arrange agents in London, San
Francisco, Hong Kong, Shanghai and all
over Asia, Paris--and St. Petersburg.
Don't forget Russians are huge buyers of
tea and will trade sables and other furs to great
profit and there are all your contacts in Russian
Alaska, and their trading posts on the American
west coast south. A good idea but risky, such a
long time between buying and selling and profit, too many
hazards for the ships, too many lost at sea or
to piracy ...
  A little further away Phillip Tyrer was also
staring into the distance. He was thinking about Fujiko and
almost groaned aloud. Yesterday evening, with his friend
Nakama--Hiraga--to help him, he had tried
to begin negotiations for her exclusivity.
Mama-san Raiko's eyes had soared and shook
her head saying, Oh so sorry, I doubt if it
is possible, the girl so valuable and wanted by so
many important gai-jin, important
gai-jin, implying that even Sir William was
an occasional client though never mentioning him by name,
which had unsettled Tyrer and made him even more
anxious.
  Raiko said that even before discussing financial and
other details, first she would ask Fujiko if
she would consider it, adding to his shock that it would be
best for him not to see her again until and unless a
contract had been agreed. It had taken him
another hour to reach a compromise that Nakama had
suggested: in the interim period, when seeing
Fujiko, he would never mention the matter or
discuss it directly with her, that was the
mama-san's responsibility.
  Thank God for Nakama, he told himself in
another sweat, I nearly messed up everything.
But for him ...
  His eyes focused and he saw Seratard and
Andr`e Poncin deep in private conversation, and
not far away from them, Erlicher, the Swiss
Minister, was equally private with Johann,
Johann concentrating on every word.
  What's so important and urgent to those men,
he asked himself, that they would discuss it at a
football match, reminding himself not to daydream,
to be adult and aware that all was not
well in Japan, to do his duty to the Crown and
Sir William--Fujiko could wait until
tonight when he might get an answer.
  Damn Johann! Now that the wily Swiss was
leaving his post as interpreter it had put a further
burden on him, leaving him little time to sleep or
to play. Only this morning Sir William had
flared, unfairly, he thought bitterly, "For
God's sake, Phillip, put in more hours.
The sooner you're fluent the better for the Crown,
the sooner Nakama is fluent in English the
better for the Crown. Earn your daily bread,
stop slacking, lean on Nakama, make him
earn his daily bread too or out he goes!"

  Hiraga was in the Legation reading a letter aloud
that Tyrer had written for Sir William which he
had helped translate, that was to be delivered tomorrow
to the Bakufu. Though he did not understand many of the
words his reading was improving rapidly: "You've
an aptitude for English, Nakama, old
boy," Tyrer had said several times. This had
pleased him, even though, normally, praise or
criticism from a gai-jin was meaningless. Over the
weeks most of his waking hours had been spent
cramming words and phrases, repeating them over and
over, so much so that the language of his dreams was
mixed up.
  "Why bash your head, Cousin?"' Akimoto
asked him.
  "I must learn English as quickly as possible.
There is so little time, this gai-jin leader is rude
and ill-tempered and I have no idea how long I
can stay. But Akimoto, if I could read who
knows what information I could get. You cannot believe
how stupid they are about their secrets. Hundreds
of books and pamphlets and documents lie around
everywhere, I have access to everything, can read anything,
and this Taira person answers my most obvious
questions."
  This was said last night in their safe house in the
village and he had had a cold towel around his
aching head. He was no longer confined to the Legation.
Now he could stay in the village if he wanted
to though many nights he was too tired to leave, and
he would stay and sleep on a spare bunk in the
cottage Tyrer shared with Babcott. Of
necessity George Babcott had had to know about
him. "Marvelous! Nakama can help me with my
Japanese too and my dictionary!
Marvelous, I'll organize lessons and a
cram course!"
  Babcott's approach was quite radical.
Learning was to be enjoyed and soon it had almost
developed into a game, a hilarious game to see
who could learn faster, an entirely new style for
Hiraga and Tyrer, for whom schooling was serious,
and education implanted by rote, repetition and the
birch.
  "How fast the lessons go, Akimoto. It
becomes easier every day--we shall do the same in our
schools when sonno-joi is supreme."
  Akimoto laughed. "Teachers gentle and
kind? No bashing or stick? Never! More
important, what about the frigate?"'
  He had told Akimoto that Tyrer had
promised he would ask a captain friend for
permission to take the two of them aboard,
explaining Akimoto as the son of a wealthy
Choshu shipbuilding family, come to visit him
for a few days, and a valuable friend in the future.
  From the open window Hiraga heard cheering from the
football match. He sighed, then reverently
picked up Babcott's handwritten dictionary.
It was the first dictionary he had ever seen, and the first
English-Japanese, Japanese-English ever.
Babcott had built on lists of words and
phrases gathered by himself, traders and priests,
both Catholic and Protestant, with others
translated from Dutch-Japanese
equivalents. At the moment the book was short.
But daily it grew and it fascinated him.
  Folklore had it that, two centuries or so
ago, a Jesuit priest called Tsukku-san
had written out a form of
Portugese-Japanese dictionary. Before that no
dictionary of any sort had ever existed. In time,
a few Dutch-Japanese ones appeared, to be
zealously guarded. "No need to lock this up,
Nakama," Babcott had said yesterday to his
astonishment, "that's not the British way.
Spread the word, let everyone learn, the more
educated everyone is the better the country." He
had smiled. "Of course not everyone agrees with
me. In any event, next week with the help of
our printing presses I'll--"'
  "Printing press, so sorry?"'
  Babcott had explained. "Soon we'll
start printing and if you promise to write a
history of Choshu I will promise
to give you a copy of my dictionary for yourself
alone."
  A week or so ago, in wonder, Hiraga
had shown Akimoto a copy of the Yokohama
Guardian. "It is the news of the day, from all
over the world, and they prepare a new version every day,
as many copies as they like--thousands if necessary ..."
  "Impossible!" Akimoto said. "Our
best block printers can't poss--"'
  "I've seen them do it! Machines do it,
Akimoto. They showed me their machines! They
set all the words in what they call type in
lines, they read left to right, the opposite to us,
right to left and down our columns of characters,
column by column. Unbelievable. I saw the
machine man make words out of individual
symbols, called "roman rett'rs"--they
say that all words in any language can be
written with only twenty-six of these symbols
an--"'
  "Impossible."
  "Listen! Each rett'r or symbol always
has the same sound so another person can read
individual letters, or words made out of them.
To make this "news paper," the printer uses
combinations of little pieces of iron with the symbol
cut into the end of it--sorry not iron but a kind of
iron called "stee'r," some name like that. This man
put the letters in a box that somehow was inked, paper
run over it and here was a new printed page that
contained something I had written a moment ago.
Taira read it out exactly! A miracle."
  "Eeee, but how can we do that with our
language, each word is a special character with as
many as five or seven different ways of saying it
and our writing's different an--"'
  "The Doctor Giant listens when I say
a Japanese word, he writes it down in their
roman rett'rs then Taira says the word just
by reading them!"
  It had taken Hiraga much more explanation
to convince Akimoto. "Eeee," he said
exhausted, "so many new things, new ideas, so
difficult for me to understand myself, let alone
explain. Ori was such a fool not to want
to learn."
  "Good for us he's dead, buried and forgotten
by the gai-jin. For days I thought we were lost."
  "So did I."
  Hiraga found the English word he
sought, "reparations." The Japanese
translation was: "money to be paid for an agreed
crime." This puzzled him. The Bakufu had
committed no crime. Two Satsumas, Ori
and Shorin, had merely killed a gai-jin, both
were now dead, two for the death of one gai-jin was
certainly fair. Why should they demand
"re-par-at-eeons," he said aloud, the
nearest his tongue could get to the word.
  He got up from the desk to ease his knees,
difficult to sit like a gai-jin all day long and
went to the window. He was wearing Western clothes but
soft tabe on his feet, English boots still very
uncomfortable for him. The day was still good, the ships
at anchor, fishing boats and others vessels
moving back and forth. The frigate beckoned. His
excitement grew. Soon they would see into its
bowels, see the great steam machines Taira had
told him about. He caught sight of a
reproduced photograph cut out of a magazine
and stuck on the wall, of the Great Ship, an
enormous iron ship being built in the British
capital city, London, the biggest that had ever
been, twenty times bigger than the frigate in the
bay. Too enormous to conceive--even
"fo-to-gr-aff" for him impossible to understand,
eerie, almost a form of evil magic. He shuddered
then noticed the door to the corridor was ajar and
across it Sir William's door. As far as he
knew there was no one in the Legation, everyone at the
football match and not expected until later this
afternoon.
  Soundlessly he opened Sir William's
door. The elaborate desk had many papers on
it, half a hundred books on untidy
shelves, a portrait of their Queen and other
paintings on the walls. Something new on a
sideboard. A photograph in a silver
frame. He saw only ugliness, a curiously
dressed gai-jin woman with three children, and
realized it must be Sir William's family,
Tyrer had mentioned they were expected soon.
  How lucky I am to be Japanese, and
civilized, with a handsome father and mother and brothers and
sisters and Sumomo to marry if it is my karma
to marry. Thinking about her safe at home warmed
him, but then, standing there in front of the desk, the good
feeling quickly turned sour. He remembered all
the sickening, uneasy times he had stood there before
the seated gai-jin leader, answering questions
about the Choshu, Satsuma, Bakufu,
Toranagas, the questions inquiring into every aspect of
his life and Nippon's life, now almost a
daily occurrence, the fish eyes scouring the truth
out of him, much as he would have preferred to lie and
confuse.
  He was careful not to touch anything, presuming a
trap had been laid for him as he would certainly
have done if he had left a gai-jin alone in such
an important place. His ears caught an
angry voice outside and he scurried back
to peer out of Tyrer's window. To his astonishment
Akimoto was at the gate, bowing to the sentry who
had him covered with his bayoneted rifle and was
shouting at him. His cousin wore gai-jin
laborer's clothes and was clearly very nervous.
  Hastily he went outside, put a smile
on his face, and raised his hat. "Good day, sir
sentry, this my friend."
  The sentry knew Hiraga by sight, that he was
some sort of interpreter, also that he had a
permanent Legation pass. He replied
caustically with incomprehensible words, waving
Akimoto away, ordering Hiraga to tell
"th's ere monkey t'pushawf or'e'll
g't'is bloody 'ead shot awf."
  Hiraga's smile never wavered. "I take
him away, so sorry." He took Akimoto
by the arm and hurried him into an alley that led to the
village. "Are you mad? To come here y--"
  "I agree." Akimoto was not over his fright
at having a bayonet shoved within an inch of his
throat. "I agree, but the shoya, the village
elder, asked me to find you urgently."

  The shoya motioned Hiraga to sit on the other
side of the low table. These private quarters, behind
his deliberately drab and untidy shop, were
spotless, the tatami and shoji window papers the
best quality. The tabby cat sat comfortably in
his lap, her eyes malevolently fixed on the
intruder. White-green porcelain teacups sat
around a small iron teapot. "Please, some
tea, Otami-sama, so sorry to cause you
inconvenience," he said pouring and using the name
Hiraga used, then stroked the cat. Her ears
twitched nervously. "Please excuse me for
interrupting you."
  The tea was aromatic and noteworthy.
Hiraga mentioned it politely,
feeling awkward in front of the shoya in his
European clothes, difficult to sit in them, and
uncomfortable without swords. After the customary
courtesies, the shoya nodded, half to himself, and
looked at his guest, eyes flinty in the mask of
graciousness. "Some news has arrived from
Ky@oto. I thought you should have it at once."
  Hiraga's disquiet increased. "So?"
  "It seems that ten shishi of Choshu,
Satsuma and Tosa, attacked Sh@ogun
Nobusada at Otsu. The assassination
attempt failed and all were killed."
  Hiraga pretended to be uninterested but he was
sick inside. Which ten and why had they failed?
"When was this?"
  The shoya had seen nothing to indicate if
Hiraga knew of the attack or not. "Eight
days ago."
  "How could you possibly know in such a short
time?"
  To his astonishment the shoya reached into his
sleeve and brought out a tiny cylinder. Inside was
a roll of very thin paper. "This arrived today. Our
Gyokoyama zaibatsu has carrier pigeons
for important news." It had actually arrived
yesterday but he had needed time to decide how he was
to deal with Hiraga. "Important to have quick,
accurate information, neh?"
  "Were names mentioned?"
  "No, no names so sorry."
  "Is that all your information?"
  The eyes glinted. To Hiraga's shock he
added, "The same night, in Ky@oto, Lord
Yoshi and Lord Ogama and their forces fell on the
shishi headquarters, caught them unawares,
destroyed it and them. Forty heads were spiked
outside the wreckage." The older man kept the
smile from his face. "Otami-sama, would forty be
a big percentage of our brave shishi?"
  Hiraga shrugged and said he did not know, hoping
that the shoya could not tell if he lied. His head was
hurting as he wondered who was dead, who
survived, who had betrayed them, and how could it be
that such enemies as Yoshi and Ogama were acting in
consort? "Why are you telling me all this?"
  For a moment the shoya looked down at the cat,
his eyes softened and his fingers began scratching the
center of her head and her eyes closed with
pleasure, her claws moving in and out of their sheaths
without menace. "It seems that not all
those ambushed were caught," he said quietly.
"Two escaped. The leader, sometimes called the
Raven, his real name is Katsumata, the trusted
advisor of Sanjiro of Satsuma, and a
Choshu shishi called Takeda."
  Hiraga was rocked to his core that so much could
be known and his muscles coiled, ready to reach out and
kill with his hands if need be. His mouth opened but
he said nothing.
  "Would you know this Takeda, Otami-sama?"
  Anger rushed through Hiraga at this impertinence,
he felt his face flush but he held on to a
measure of control. "Why are you telling me this,
shoya?"
  "My Gyokoyama overlord ordered it,
Otami-sama."
  "Why? What is all this to me? Eh?"
  The shoya, to calm his own nerves--though he had
a small, loaded pistol in the pocket of his
sleeve--poured some more tea for both of them, knowing
this was a dangerous game and this shishi was no man
to fool with. But orders were orders, and standing orders
of the Gyokoyama zaibatsu were that anything
unusual, in any of their hundred branches, must
be reported instantly. Particularly the
Yokohama branch, more important now than
Nagasaki as it was the main gai-jin base, and so
the main observation post on gai-jin--and he
specially chosen for the senior post. Of necessity
he had carrier-pigeoned news of this man's
arrival, Ori's death, all subsequent
events and the actions he himself had taken--all of which
had been approved.
  "The Gyokoyama ..." he began, following
instructions and using great care, for he could see
Hiraga was seething and unnerved by the revelations,
which was their purpose. His overlords in Osaka had
written: Put this shishi, whose real name is
Rezan Hiraga, off balance quickly. Risks
will be great. Be armed and talk to him when he is not
...
  "... my Masters thought that perhaps they could be of
use to you, as you could be of great value to them."
  "Use to me?" Hiraga grated, ready
to explode, his right hand nervously seeking the
sword hilt that was not there. "I can order no
taxes. I have no koku. What use have I for
parasites, that's what moneylenders are, what
even the great Gyokoyama is! Neh?"
  "It is true that samurai believe
it and have believed it forever. But we wonder if your
Sensei Taira would agree."
  "Eh?" Again Hiraga was unbalanced and he
stuttered, "What about Taira? What about him?"
  "Maid! Sak`e!" the shoya called out, then
to Hiraga, "I ask your patience but my
superiors ... I am an old man," he added
humbly, with open self-deprecation, knowing his power
in the zaibatsu was large, his yang still functioned
perfectly, and if need be he could shoot this man
or cripple him and hand him over to the Bakufu
enforcers who still guarded their gates. "I am old
and we live in dangerous times."
  "Yes you do," Hiraga said through his teeth. The
sak`e came quickly, the maid poured quickly and
fled. Hiraga quaffed some and was glad of it though
he feigned otherwise, accepted more and drained that
too. "So? Taira? You better make sense."
  The shoya took a deep breath, launching himself
on what he knew would be the biggest chance of his
life, with vast implications for his zaibatsu and
all his future generations: "Ever since you have been
here, Otami-sama, you have wondered and enquired
how and why the Ing'erish gai-jin rule much of the world
outside our shores when they are a small island
nation, I understand smaller than ours ..." He
stopped, amused by the sudden blank look on
Hiraga's face. "Ah so sorry, but you must
know you have been overheard talking to your friend who is
now dead, and your cousin, so sorry. I can
assure you your confidences are safe, your aims and
Gyokoyama aims and shishi aims are the same.
It could be important to you ... We believe we
know a major secret you seek."
  "Eh?"
  "Yes, we believe the major secret is
their moneylending, banking and financ--"
  He was drowned out as Hiraga was convulsed with a
paroxysm of jeering laughter. The cat was torn from
her tranquility and her claws dug through the
shoya's kimono into his flesh. Gingerly he
eased the claws out and began to sooth her,
controlling his fury, wishing he could beat some sense
into the insolent young man. But that would cost him his
life eventually--there would be Akimoto to deal with,
and other shishi. Doggedly he waited, the task his
overlords had given him fraught with hazards:
"probe this young man, find out what his true
aims are, true thoughts, true desires and
allegiance, use him, he could be a
perfect tool ..."
  "You are mad. It's only their machines and
cannon and wealth and ships."
  "Exactly. If we had those,
Hiraga-sama, we could ..." The instant he
deliberately used the real name he saw all
laughter vanish and the eyes focus, menacingly.
"My superiors told me to use your name only
once, and then only so you would know we are to be
trusted."
  "How-do-they-know?"
  "You mentioned the Shinsaku Otami account, the
code name of your honored father, Toyo Hiraga.
Of course this is written in their most private
books of record."
  Hiraga was filled with rage. It had never
occurred to him that moneylenders would have private
books, and as everyone, from the low to the highest,
needed their services from time to time, moneylenders would
have access to all kinds of private knowledge, recorded
knowledge, dangerous knowledge that they could use as pressure or
a cudgel to gain all kinds of other information they
should not have--how could they possibly have found out about
our shishi except by foul means--as this dog is
daring to use on me! Rightfully merchants and
moneylenders are despised and distrusted and should be
stamped out. When sonno-joi's a fact, our
first request to the Emperor should be an order for their
destruction. "So!"
  The shoya was prepared, aware the thread between a
sudden, berserk attack and sanity was stretched
to breaking, shishi never to be trusted, one hand not far
from his sleeve pocket. He kept his voice
soft, nevertheless there was no mistaking the threat, or
promise: "My superiors told me to tell you
that your secrets and those of your father, honored
clients, though recorded, are private,
completely private ... between us."
  Hiraga sighed and sat back, the threat
cleansing his head of useless anger, and he considered
all that the shoya had told him, the threat--or the
promise--and all the rest, the danger of the man
himself, the Gyokoyama and their like, weighing his
choice, his heritage and training in the balance.
  The choice was simple: To kill or not
to kill, to listen or not to listen. When he was very young
his mother had said, "Beware, my son, and remember
seriously: to kill is easy, to unkill
impossible."
  For a moment his mind dwelt on her,
always wise, always welcoming him, always with arms
outstretched--even during the pains in her joints that
were a way of life for her as long as he could
remember, and twisted her a little worse every year.
"Very well, shoya, I will listen, once."
  In his turn the shoya sighed, a major ravine
straddled. He filled the cups.
"To sonno-joi and shishi!"
  They drank. He replenished the cups from time
to time. "Otami-sama, please be patient with me
but we believe we can have all that the gai-jin have.
As you know, in Nippon rice is a currency,
rice merchants are bankers, they lend money
to farmers against future crops, to buy seeds and so
on, without the money most years there would be no
crops therefore no taxes to collect; they lend
to samurai and daimyos for their living against
future pay, future koku, future taxes,
without this money there is usually no living until
there are crops to tax. Money makes any way
of life possible. Money, in the form of gold,
silver, rice or silk or even manure,
money is the wheel of life, profit the grease
of the wheel an--"
  "Come to the point. The secret."
  "Oh so sorry, the point is that somehow,
incredibly, gai-jin moneylenders, bankers--in
their world it is an honorable profession--have found
a way to finance all their industries, machines,
ships, cannon, buildings, armies anything and
everything, profitably, without using real gold.
There cannot be that amount of real gold in all the world.
Somehow they can make vast loans using the
promise of real gold, or pretend gold,
and that alone makes them strong, and, seemingly, they
do it without debasing their currency, as daimyos
do."
  "Pretend gold? What are you talking about?
Be clearer!"
  The shoya wiped a bead of sweat off his lip,
excited now, the sak`e helping his tongue, but more
so because now he began to believe it was possible that this
youth could solve the puzzle. "Excuse me if
I am complicated but we know what they do, but not
yet know how they do it. Perhaps your Taira, this
gai-jin fountain of information you so cleverly drain,
perhaps he would know, could explain to you how they do it,
the tricks, the secrets, then you can tell us and
we can make Nippon as strong as five
Englands. When you achieve
sonno-joi, we and other moneylenders can join
to finance all the ships and arms Nippon will ever
need ..."
  Cautiously, he elaborated on his theme,
eloquently answering questions, guiding Hiraga,
helping him, flattering him, judiciously plying
him with sak`e and knowledge, impressed with his
intelligence, over the hours snaring his imagination and
he continued until the sun was down.
  "Money, eh? I will ad ... admit,
shoya," Hiraga said unsteadily, heavy with
alcohol, his head bursting with so many new and
unsettling ideas that conflicted with as many deep
beliefs, "admit money never inter ... ested
me. Never really, really understood money, only
the lack." A belch almost choked him. "I, I
think I can see, yes, Taira will tell me."
He tried to get up and failed.
  "First may I offer a bath, and I will send for the
masseuse?" The shoya easily persuaded him,
called for a servant to help and gave Hiraga
over to strong though gentle hands--soon to be
snoring and oblivious.
  "Well done, Ichi-chan," his wife whispered
when it was safe, beaming at him. "You were perfect,
neh?"
  He beamed back, also speaking softly, "He
is dangerous, always will be, but we begin, that's the
important part."
  She nodded, satisfied that he had taken her
advice to send for Hiraga this afternoon, to be armed,
and not to be afraid to use the threat. Both knew
the risks, but then, she reminded herself, her heart
still pounding from listening to the parry and thrust, this is an
opportunity sent by the gods and gains are
proportionate to risks. Eeee, she chortled
to herself, with success we will be granted samurai
status, our descendants will be samurai, and my
Ichi will be a Gyokoyama overlord. "You were so
wise to say two and not three escapees and not
to reveal what else we know."
  "It is important to keep something in
reserve. To further control him."
  She patted her husband maternally and again told
him how clever he was and did not remind him that this
too had been her suggestion. She let her mind
drift a moment, still puzzled by the two shishi
making for Yedo, thus surely risking capture
or betrayal immeasurably. And even more
puzzling was why the girl Sumomo,
Hiraga's samurai wife-to-be, had joined
the household of Koiko, Yedo's most famous
courtesan, now the pleasure person of Lord
Yoshi. Very puzzling indeed.
  A vagrant thought blossomed. "Ichi-chan,"
she said delicately, "something you said earlier
made me want to ask you: if these gai-jin are so
clever and such magical bankers, would it not be
wise for you to begin a careful venture with one of
them, quietly, very quietly." She saw his
eyes fix and the dawning of a seraphic smile.
"Toshi is nineteen, the cleverest of our sons,
and could be the figurehead, neh?"

                 

    Monday, 1st December:
  Norbert Greyforth came on deck of the mail
ship just rounding the headland. She was from Hong Kong
via Shanghai and now ahead was the Yokohama
coastline. He was freshly shaven and wore a
top hat and frock coat against the early morning
chill and he saw the Captain and others on the
bridge in front of the funnel with its plume of
acrid smoke trailing aft, seamen preparing for
port, sails furled on her three masts. On
the foredeck, behind locked grills separating them
completely from the rest of the ship, were steerage
passengers, the flotsam of Asia, remittance
men and riffraff, huddled under canvas shelters.
Grills were standard on passenger ships against
piracies attempted from this area.
  The wind was brisk and smelt good to him and tasted
clean, not like below where the stench of oil and coal
smoke and the throbbing, headache-making engine noise
permeated the closeness. Asian Queen had
been under power for hours, battling the head wind.
Much as he loathed steamers, Norbert was pleased,
otherwise they would have been many more days late. He
bit the end off a cheroot, spat it overboard and
cupped his hands, lighting it carefully.
  The Settlement looked the same as ever.
Samurai guard houses and Customs House,
north and south, outside the fence and over small
bridges, smoke from various chimneys, men
walking the promenade, horsemen exercising their
ponies on the racetrack, Drunk Town its
usual mess with little of their fire and earthquake
damage cleaned up, contrasting with the disciplined tent
lines of the encampment on the bluff where
soldiers were drilling, the odd bugle call
wafting seawards. As if peeping over the fence were
the Yoshiwara roofs. He felt a halfhearted
stirring, nothing like normal for he was still satiated
from carousing in Shanghai, the richest, raunchiest,
wildest city in Asia, with the best racing,
gambling, whoring, bars and European food
anywhere.
  Never mind, he thought, I'll give Sako the
bolt of silk and that'll make her toolie
flutter and who knows?
  His eyes passed the flagpoles of the various
Legations, hardened as they saw the Struan
Building, then centered on his own. During the
three weeks he had been away he was pleased
to see external repairs to the top floor had
been completed, no sign of fire damage. He
was too far away to recognize people going in and out
of the buildings fronting High Street, then he
caught a glimpse of a blue bonnet and hooped
dress and parasol crossing to the French Legation.
Only one like that, he thought. Angel Tits! It
was as if he could smell the perfume surrounding
her. Wonder if she knows about the duel.
  Morgan Brock had guffawed when he told
them. "Thee's my consent to blow his head or
balls off. 'Stead of pistols, make it fighting
irons and really earn thy bonus."
  Tenders were already scurrying to meet the mail
ship. Sourly, he noted that the Struan steam
launch was waiting in the chop, first in line,
Jamie McFay in the stern. His oared launch
second. Never mind, won't be long before your
launch's mine, your building, with you and all the
bloody Struans beached or dead, though maybe
I'll give you a job, Jamie, maybe, just for
amusement. Then he saw McFay put
binoculars to his eyes and knew he would see
him. He waved perfunctorily, spat over the
side and went to his cabin below.
  "'Morning, Mr. Greyforth, suh," Edward
Gornt said with Southern charm. He stood at the
door of the cabin opposite, a tall, though
slight, good-looking young man from Virginia,
twenty-seven, with deep set, brown eyes and
brown hair, "I've been watching from the aft
deck. Nothing like Shanghai, is it?"
  "In more ways than you can think. Are you
packed?"
  "Yes, suh, and ready to have at it."
Apart from the slight roll to the "suh" his accent
was faint, much more English than Southern.
  "Good. Sir Morgan told me to give you this
when we arrived." He took an envelope from his
briefcase and handed it him. The more he thought about his
whole trip the more flabbergasted he became.
Tyler Brock had not come to Shanghai. A
curt note had greeted Greyforth instead,
telling him to obey his son, Morgan, as though
he was giving the orders. Sir Morgan Brock
was a big-bellied, balding man, not as coarse as
his father, but just as mean-tempered and bearded like him.
Unlike him, he was London-trained in
Threadneedle Street, center of the world's stock
markets, and for all manner of international trade.
As soon as Greyforth arrived Morgan had
laid out his plan to break Struan's.
  It was foolproof.
  For a year he, his father and their associates on
the board of the Victoria Bank of Hong Kong
had been buying up Struan's debt paper.
Now, with the whole board backing them, they only had
to wait until the 30th of January to foreclose.
There was no way Struan's could meet this
deadline. On that date the bank would own
Struan's, lock, stock and clipper ship with
Morgan cornering the Hawaiian sugar
markets, cunningly excluding Struans who
counted on their yearly profits from those markets
to service their debts, he would make the killing
certain. And another, even bigger coup:
Morgan, with supreme cleverness, had bartered these
crops forward to Union and Confederate importers
for Union goods and Southern cotton for the huge
British market that still, by law, could only be
serviced by British ships--their ships.
  "It's a genius scheme, Sir Morgan,
congratulations," Norbert said, awed, for it would
make Brock's the wealthiest trading company in
Asia, the Noble House, and guarantee his
stipend of five thousand guineas a year.
  "We be buying Struan's at ten pennies in
the pound from the Bank, that be agreed, Norbert,
their fleet, everything," Sir Morgan had said,
his huge belly shaking with laughter. "Thee's
to retire soon, and we be very grateful for thy
service. If all goes well in Yokohama,
we be thinking of another five thousand a year as
bonus. Look after young Edward and show him
everything."
  "To what end?"' he had asked, that vast amount
of money every year swamping him.
  "To any end I want," Sir Morgan
had said curtly. "But since thee asks, perhaps
I be wanting him to take over Japan, take
over thy job when thee goes, if he's worthy.
Rothwell's be giving him a month's leave"--
this was Gornt's present employer, one of the
oldest Shanghai companies and associates of
Cooper-Tillman, the biggest American China
trader, for whom he had been working for three
years, and with whom Brock's, as well as
Struan's, had extensive business relations--
"this be enough time for the lad to decide, perhaps he'll
take over from thee, when thee retires."
  "You think he's experienced enough, Sir
Morgan?"'
  "By the time thee leaves, make sure he is--
that's thy job, teach him, toughen him. Don't
break him, I don't want him scared off,
broken, don't forget now!"
  "How much should I tell him?"'
  After thought, Sir Morgan said, "Everything
about our business in the Japans, the gunrunning
plan and opium smuggling if them bastards in
Parliament get their way. Tell him thy ideas
on opening up the opium trade and busting any
embargo if there be one, but nought about provoking
Struan, or about our scheme to smash them. The
lad knows about the Struans, no love lost on
them at Rothwell's, he knows what scum they
really be and the devilment old Dirk did,
murdering my stepbrother and the like. He's a good
lad, so tell him what thee will, but not about
sugar!"
  "Just as you say, Sir Morgan. What about
all the specie and paper I brought? I'll need
replacements to pay for the guns, silks and this
year's trade goods."
  "I be sending it from Hong Kong, when I
returns, and Norbert, it were right clever to shove
Struan's out of the way with the Jappo prospecting
offer--if that pays dirt, thee will share in't. As
to Edward, after the month send him to Hong Kong with a
confidential report to the Old Man. I like the
lad, he be highly thought of in Shanghai and
by Rothwell's--and the son of an old friend."
  Norbert had wondered about "what" old friend,
and about the debt Sir Morgan owed the man
to take so much trouble, unusual for him
to be kind to anyone. But he was too shrewd to ask
and kept his own counsel, happy that the problem of
staying in the Brock's good favor would not concern
him much longer.
  Edward Gornt proved to be pleasant enough,
reticent, a good listener, more English than
American, intelligent, and, rare in Asia, a
nondrinker. Greyforth's immediate assessment had
been that Gornt was totally unsuited to the rough,
adventurous, hard-drinking China trade--a
lightweight in everything, except at cards.
Gornt was an exceptional bridge player and
lucky at poker, a major virtue in Asia,
but even this was academic for he never played for
high stakes.
  He was convinced that Edward Gornt would not suit
the Brocks for long, and nothing on the voyage
back had made him change his mind. From time to time
he had seen a strangeness behind the eyes. The
bugger's just wishywashy, out of his depth and knows it,
he thought, watching him reading Morgan's letter.
Never mind, if anyone can make him grow up I
can.
  Gornt folded the letter, pocketed it and the sheaf
of money the envelope had contained. "Sir
Morgan's so generous, isn't he?" he said with a
smile. "I never thought he'd ... I can't
wait to begin, to learn, I like work and action and
I'll do my best to please you, but I'm still not
sure if I should leave Rothwell's and ...
well I never thought he would ever consider I would
maybe be good enough to head Brock's in Japan if
or when you retire. Never."
  "Sir Morgan's a tough master, difficult
to please, like our tai-pan, but straight if you do
what you're told. A month will be enough. Can you
handle a gun?"
  "Oh yes."
  The sudden directness surprised him. "What
kinds?"
  "Handguns, rifles, shotguns." Again the
smile. "I've never killed anyone, Indians
or the like, but I was second in the Richmond
skeet-shoot four years ago." A shadow went
over him. "That was the year I went to London
to join Brock's."
  "You didn't want to leave? Didn't like
London?"
  "No, and yes. My mother had died and, and my
father, he thought it best I should be out in the
world, London being the Center of the World so to speak.
London was grand. Sir Morgan very kind.
Kindest man I know."
  Norbert waited but Gornt volunteered
nothing more, lost in his own thoughts. Sir Morgan
had only told him Gornt had spent a
satisfactory year with Brock's in London,
with Tyler Brock's last and youngest son, Tom.
After the year he had arranged the junior post at
Rothwell's. "Do you know Dmitri Syborodin
who runs Cooper-Tillman here?"
  "No, suh. Only by reputation. My parents
knew Judith Tillman, the widow of one of the
original partners." Gornt's eyes had narrowed
and Norbert noticed the strangeness in them. "She
didn't like Dirk Struan either, loathed him in
fact, blamed him for the death of her husband. The
sins of the father do pass onwards, don't they?"
  Norbert laughed. "They do indeed."
  "You were saying suh? Dmitri Syborodin?"
  "You'll like him, he's Southern too." The
landing bell sounded. Norbert's eyes glittered
with anticipation, "Let's get ashore, there'll
be action soon enough."

  "Man wan' see tai-pan, heya?" Ah
Tok said.
  "Ayeeyah, speak civilized, Mother, and not
gibberish," Malcolm told her in
Cantonese. He stood at his office window,
binoculars in his hand, and had been watching the mail
ship unloading passengers. He had seen
Norbert Greyforth and now he was feeling very good.
"What man?"
  "The foreign devil bonze you sent for, the
foul-smelling bonze," she mumbled. "Your Old
Mother is working too hard and her Son won't
listen! We should be going home."
  "Ayeeyah, I've told you not to mention going
home," he told her sharply, "do that once more and
I'll pack you off on the next dirty little
lorcha where you'll puke your heart out if you have
one, and at the very least the God of the Sea will
swallow you up! Send the foreign devil in."
A smile crossed his face and some of his good
feeling returned.
  She went off grumbling. For days she had been
harping on a return to Hong Kong, as much as he
told her not to. So much so, he was sure she had
had orders from Gordon Chen to harass
him into obeying.
  "By God, I won't until I'm ready."
He hobbled back to his desk glad that his
score with Norbert would soon be settled and his
whole glorious plan put into effect. "Ah,
'morning, Reverend Tweet, kind of you to be
prompt. Sherry?"
  "Thank you, Mr., er, Tai-pan, bless you."
  The sherry went in a nervous gulp though
Struan had deliberately chosen a big
glass. "Admirable, er, Tai-pan. Ah
yes, thanks, I'll have another small one,
bless you." The untidy sack of a man settled with
an uneasy smile in the tall chair. Tobacco
stained his beard. "What can I do for you?"
  "It's about myself and Miss Angelique. I
want you to marry us. Next week."
  "Eh?" The Reverend Michaelmas Tweet
almost dropped his glass. "Impossible," he
stuttered, his false teeth chattering.
  "No it isn't. There's lot of precedent for
condensing the bans that have to be read out on three
succeeding Sundays in church into one Sunday
only."
  "But I can't, you're a minor and so is she and
worse she's Catholic and there's no possible
way. ... I can't."
  "Oh, but you can." Confidently he parroted
what Heatherly Skye, nicknamed
"Heavenly," the only lawyer in Yokohama
as well as coroner and insurance agent, had told
him. "The fact that I'm a minor applies
only in the United Kingdom, not in the colonies
or abroad, and only when the father is alive. That
she's Catholic doesn't matter if it
doesn't matter to me. That ends that. Tuesday the
9th is an auspicious day to be married on,
we keep everything quiet until then and that's when
it will be."
  To Malcolm's amusement Michaelmas
Tweet's mouth opened and closed like a fish but no
sound came out. Shakily, the clergyman groped
to his feet, poured another sherry, gulped it,
then collapsed into the chair again. "I can't."
  "Oh but I've taken legal advice and
I'm advised you can. Also I intend to endow you and
your church with an extra stipend--five hundred
guineas a year." He knew the man was hooked
for the offer was three or four times his present
salary and twice what the lawyer had
advised: Don't spoil the old fart!
"We'll be in church on Sunday to hear the bans
read, Tuesday's the great day, the same day you
get a hundred guineas advance for your trouble.
Thank you, Reverend." He stood but Tweet
did not move and he saw his eyes fill with
tears. "What on earth's the matter?"
  "I just can't do what you ask," Tweet
spluttered, "it's, it's not possible. You see
your ... even if that advice is correct which
I, er, I doubt ... your mother wrote to me, she
wrote formally, by the last post saying that ... that your
father had made her your legal guardian and you had
been forbidden to marry." The tears were flowing down his
cheeks, his rheumy eyes bloodshot, "Dear
God in Heaven, that's so much money, more than I
ever dreamed, but I can't, I can't go against the law
or her, dear God no!"
  "A thousand guineas."
  "Oh God, don't, don't," the tired old
man burst out, "much as I want the money ...
don't you see, the marriage wouldn't be legal,
against church law. God knows I'm as big a
sinner as the next but I can't and if she wrote
to me surely she wrote to Sir William who
must sanction any such marriage. God forgive
me, I can't. ..." He stumbled out of the room.
  Malcolm stared after him. Speechless, his mind
blank, his office suddenly a tomb. The plan,
hatched with Heavenly Skye, had been perfect.
They would marry quietly, just Jamie and perhaps
Dmitri, then he would leave at once for Hong
Kong after the duel to be there well before Christmas
as his mother had asked and before the news could possibly
reach her. Angelique would follow on the next
boat.
  "Those whom God hath joined together, let no
man--or woman--cast asunder," Heavenly
Skye had intoned when he had consulted him.
  "Perfect! That's perfect, Heavenly."
  "Thank you, Tai-pan. The fee's fifty
guineas. Could I, er, could I have a down payment,
cash if you please."
  Fifty guineas was outrageous. Even so
Malcolm Struan had given him ten
sovereigns, with Noble House chits for the balance,
and had walked home, feeling lighter than in
weeks.
  "You're in a happy mood today, Malcolm.
Good news?"'
  "Yes, my darling Angel, but I'll share
it with you tomorrow. Meanwhile when do we see our
picture, your dress was really marvelous."
  "It takes such a time to develop whatever
has to be developed. Perhaps tomorrow. You looked so
handsome."
  "Wonderful. I think we should have a party
..."
  But now, with the party arranged for tonight, it would not be
wonderful. He was totally downcast. Perhaps there was
a way to force Tweet? Should he have at him tomorrow
when the shock had warn off? More money? Sir
William? A sudden idea. He rang the
bell. "Yes, Tai-pan?"
  "Vargas, run over to the Catholic church and
find Father Leo. Ask him if he could step by for a
moment."
  "Certainly, Tai-pan. When should he come?"
  "Now, as soon as possible."
  "Now, Tai-pan? But it's lunch tim--"
  "Now, by God!" Malcolm shouted, so pent
up was his frustration that he had to ask others to do the
simplest jobs that he could have done himself before the
Tokaid@o--God curse those swine, God
curse the Tokaid@o--it's like B.c. and
A.d. for me except the bad is now, not the
good. "Now. Hurry up!"
  Vargas was white-faced as he rushed off.
While he waited, Malcolm tried to think of
ways to strongarm Tweet, letting his mind brood
and, as the minutes passed slowly, becoming ever more
infuriated and ever more determined.
  "Father Leo, Tai-pan." Vargas stepped
aside and closed the door after him.
  The priest tried to hide his nervousness.
Several times he had begun to walk here to discuss
with the Senhor's conversion to Catholicism, but each
time he had stopped, promising himself he would go tomorrow
but never had, afraid of making a mistake,
stumbling over the words. In desperation he had sought
out Andr`e Poncin to arrange a rendezvous and had
been shocked at the way Poncin, then the French
Minister personally--who rarely talked him--had
reacted, telling him such a discussion was
premature, advising him God's work needed
patience and prudence, forbidding the approach for the time
being.
  "'Morning," Malcolm said weakly.
  This was the first time any of the Protestant
traders had ever invited him into an
office. Throughout the Protestant world, feelings
against Catholics and their priests were seriously
antagonistic, accusing them of bloody pogroms
and religious wars, recent and never to be
forgotten, reminding them of the iron control they
exercised over their converts and countries they
dominated--Protestants, equally loathed
by Catholics and according to Catholic beliefs,
heretic.
  "The Blessings of God upon Thee," Father Leo
murmured tentatively. Before leaving his little
bungalow adjoining the church he had hastily said
a prayer that the summons was about what he had
prayed so hard for. "Yes, my son?"
  "Please, I want you to marry Miss
Angelique and me." Malcolm was astonished that
his voice sounded so calm, abruptly appalled
that he was not only saying it but had actually sent
for the priest, whilst understanding clearly the
implications of what he asked--Mother will have a
fit, our friends and our whole world will think I've
gone raving mad ...
  "God be thanked," Father Leo had burst out in
ecstatic Portuguese, his eyes closed, arms
lifted up to Heaven, "how marvelous are the ways
of God, I thank Thee, thank Thee for answering
my prayers, may I be worthy of Thy
favor!"
  "What?" Malcolm stared at him.
  "Ah, senhor, my son, please forgive
me," he said in English again, "I was just thanking
God that in His mercy He has shown you the
light."
  "Oh. Sherry?" was all Malcolm could think
of to say.
  "Ah, thank, you, my son, but first will you pray
with me?" At once the priest came nearer and
went on his knees, closed his eyes and puts his
hands together in prayer. Embarrassed by the man's
sincerity--though disregarding his prayers as meaningless
--and unable to kneel anyway, Malcolm stayed
seated and closed his eyes and said a small prayer
to God, sure that God would understand this momentary
lapse, trying to convince himself it was quite all right to have
this man to do what was needed.
  That the ceremony would probably be invalid in
his world, was unimportant. It would be valid for
Angelique. She could join his marriage bed with a
clear conscience. And once the initial storm in
Hong Kong had settled and his mother won
over--or even if she wasn't--as soon as he
was of age next May a proper ceremony would
correct any little wrong.
  He half opened his eyes. Father Leo was lost
in the jumble of Latin. The prayer dragged on,
and the blessing. When it was over Father Leo got to his
feet, the little coffee beans of his eyes sparkling
in his swarthy jowls. "Please allow me to serve
the sherry, to save you pain, senhor, after all now
I am your servant too," he said jovially.
"How are your wounds? How are you feeling?"
  "Fair. Now ..." Malcolm could not bring
himself to call him "Father." "Now, about the
marriage I th--"
  "It will be done, my son, it will be done
marvelously, I promise." How wonderful are
the works of God, Father Leo thought. I have not
broken my promise to the French Minister, God
has brought this poor youth to me. "Don't
worry, senhor, it is the will of God you have asked
me, and it will be done for the Glory of God." Father
Leo gave him a full glass, and poured one for
himself, spilling a little. "To your future happiness
and God's mercy." He drank, then sat in the
chair with such friendliness--the chair that such a short
time ago had been occupied with such rejection--that
Malcolm was further unsettled.
  "Now, your wedding, it will be the best, the biggest
ever held," the priest said and rushed onwards, his
enthusiasm vast, and Malcolm's spirits drooped
lower for he wanted this temporary wedding to be
kept quiet. "We must have a choir and an
organ, and new vestments and silver goblets for
Communion but before those details, my son, there
are many wonderful plans to discuss. The children for
instance, now they will be saved, they will be Catholic
and saved from Purgatory and the agonies of
eternal Hellfire!"
  Malcolm cleared his throat. "Yes. Now,
the marriage should be next week, Tuesday's the
best day."
  Father Leo blinked. "But there's your conversion,
my son. That takes time and y--"
  "I, well I don't want to convert, not
yet, though I agree that, that the children will be
Catholic." They'll all be brought up
properly, and be intelligent, he reasoned,
feeling sicker by the moment. They'll be able
to choose for themselves when they're adult ... What
am I thinking about? Long before that we'll
be properly married in a proper church.
"Please, next week, Tuesday, that's the
day."
  The eyes no longer smiled. "You're not going
to embrace to the True Faith? What of your
immortal soul?"
  "No, no thank you, not at the moment. I, I
will, I will certainly consider it. The, the souls of the
children ... that's important ..." Malcolm
tried to sound more coherent. "Now, the marriage,
I'd like it private, a simple ceremony,
Tuesday wo--"
  "But your immortal soul, my son. God
has shown you the light, your soul is even more
important than this marriage."
  "Well, I'll certainly consider it, yes
I will. Now the marriage. Tuesday would be
perfect."
  The priest set his glass down, his mind
tangled with joys and hopes and questions and fears and
danger signals. "But, my son, that will not be
possible, no, not for many reasons. The girl is
underage, no? Her father's approval must be
obtained, documents approved. You, the same,
no?"
  "A minor?" Malcolm forced a tentative
laugh. "It doesn't apply in my case, not
when your father is dead. It's, it's English law.
I checked it with ... with Mr. Skye." He just
managed to stop using "Heavenly" but cursed
himself anyway for mentioning him at all as he
suddenly remembered Angelique telling him how
Father Leo hated the man, hated the nickname,
believing him, an open agnostic, to be an
abomination.
  "That person?" Father Leo's voice hardened.
"His opinion will certainly have to be approved
by your Sir William, he's certainly not to be
trusted and as to the senhorita's father, he can come from
Bangkok, no?"
  "He's ... I believe he's returned
to France. He won't be necessary, I'm sure
Mr. Seratard can act for her. Tuesday would be
perfect."
  "But, my son, why the hurry, you're both
young, so much life ahead, your soul to consider."
Father Leo tried a smile. "It's God's will
you sent for me, in a month or two y--"
  "Not, not in a month or two," Malcolm
said, ready to explode, his voice
strangled. "Wednesday or Tuesday, please."
  "Reconsider, my son, your immortal soul
should be y--"
  "Forget my soul ..." Malcolm paused
to get a grip on himself. "I thought I would endow
the church though it's not, not currently my church,
endow it handsomely."
  Father Leo heard the "currently" and the way
"handsomely" had been said, ever conscious that
God's work on earth required practical
servants and pragmatic solutions. And funds.
And influence. And those two essentials came
only from the highborn and the rich, no need to remind
himself that the tai-pan of the Noble House was both,
or that already today a giant step forward in the
service of God had been made: he had been
asked for a favor, and the children would be saved even if
this poor sinner burned in the Molten Torment.
A shiver went through him, appalled for this youth and
all those who would needlessly suffer such horror for
all eternity when salvation was so easy to obtain.
  He pushed that problem aside. The will of God
is the will of God. "The marriage will take
place, my son, never fear, I promise ...
but not next week or the week after, there are too
many barriers."
  Malcolm felt his heart about to burst. "God
Almighty, if it can't be next week or the
latest the week after, then it's no good, it has
to be then--or nothing."
  "But why? And why private, my son?"
  "It has to be then, or nothing," Malcolm
repeated, his face twisted. "You, you will find me
a good friend ... I need your help ... For
God's sake it's a simple thing to marry us!"
  "Yes, yes it is, for God, but not for us, my
son." The priest sighed and got up. "I will
ask God's guidance. I doubt if ... but
perhaps. Perhaps. I would have to be very sure."
  The words hung in the air.

  "I hate to pour feces on your bouquet of
roses, Tai-pan," Heavenly Skye said,
steepling his fingers. He was slumped behind his desk
in his drab little office. "But since you ask my
professional advice I'd say your Father
Leo's not to be trusted, not a jot or tittle,
unless you convert. There's no way that can be done in
time and I wouldn't advise that, oh dear no.
He'll puppet you like a will-o'-the-
wisp and your vital dates will pass and you'll be
truly buggered."
  "Then for Christ's sake, Heavenly, what do
I do?"
  Skye hesitated, blew his bulbous nose and
cleaned his pince-nez, small spectacles, a
favorite ploy to allow time to compose himself, or
to cover a lapse, or, in this case, to prevent
an all-pervading beam.
  This was the first time anyone important had
consulted him since he had hung up his own
shingle, H. Skye, Esq., late of
Moodle, Putfield and Leech,
Solicitors and Barristers, Inns of Court,
London, initially in Calcutta ten years
ago, then Hong Kong, and recently here. At
long last he had, potentially, a perfect
client: rich, beset with anxiety, with a simple
problem that could become ever more complicated, with
long-term possibilities from the cradle to the
grave. And grand fees, for a solution, of which there
were many, some good, some violent.
  "Can't think of a worse pickle to be in,"
he said, solemnly, playing his part, liking and
admiring the youth, not merely as a client, then
offered a key, "The Gordian knot, eh?"
  Malcolm was miserable. Obviously Heavenly
was right, Father Leo can't be trusted. Even if I
converted ... I can't, that would be too much ...
He looked up abruptly. "Knot?
Gordian knot? That was solved! Ulysses
hacked it in two. No, it was Hercules!"
  "Sorry, Alexander the Great in 333
B.c."
  "Whoever did it, doesn't matter, my
problem is ... Heavenly, help me cut through
my knot and you've my undying gratitude and
five hundred guineas ..."
  The Harbor Master's signal gun echoed
over the Settlement. They looked out of the
mildewed window--Skye's office was in
Lunkchurch's building and godown, stacked with
books, fronting the sea. To their joy the fleet
was rounding the headland in line ahead, flagship to the
fore, with flags overall. Pride filled them, and
relief. Cannonade salutes thundered from shore
and ships, H.m.s. Pearl the most
exuberant, with replying salvos from the fleet.
  Both men whooped, and Skye said, "Now we can
deal with the Jappos and sleep snug in
our beds." Obliquely, he returned to the
matter in hand, envying him Angelique and
determined to help. "Not difficult to solve
Jappos, Willie needs to be simple and
decisive, the old iron fist in the iron
glove, or velvet, applies in most, if not
all cases. As with you."
  Malcolm Struan looked at him. "How?
How? If you solve my problem you can ... you can
name your own price." Tiredly he reached for his
canes. "Within reason."
  "A moment, Tai-pan," Skye said,
exuberantly polishing his glasses. My price
won't only be money, not from the Noble House,
your influence can help me become a Hong Kong
judge, ah, what joy that will be! My only
dilemma is should I reveal the solution now, or
wait and risk losing the initiative. Not on your
Nelly! A bird in the bed is worth two in the
Yoshiwara.
  No longer solemn, he set his pince-nez
back on the tip of his nose, now like twin doors
dominating his pink, babyish face, which seemed
to overflow them. "I had a sudden thought,
Tai-pan. It could solve your problem, in the time
you need. Why don't you do what your mother did?"
  Malcolm was thrown for a moment, then the meaning
became clear. "Oh, oh you mean elope?
I've thought of that for God's sake," he said
irritably, "but elope where and who's going
to perform the ceremony, we're a million miles
from Macao."
  "What has Macao to do with it?" Skye
asked.
  "Everyone knows mother and father eloped and were married
in the English Church in Macao, the ceremony
performed quietly and quickly because of grandfather's
influence."
  Skye smiled and shook his head. "That's the
published the story but it's not true. Your
Captain Orlov married them aboard your
clipper China Cloud en route from Macao
to Hong Kong--your grandfather had made your father
Master for that short voyage, and as you know the
tai-pan's law is that at sea the Master was the
law of the ship."
  Struan was gaping at him. "I don't
believe it."
  "The first attribute of a good lawyer, and I
am a good lawyer, Mr. Struan, is
to be a good listener, the second to have a nose for
facts and secrets, the third to be discreet.
It's very important to know as much as you can about your
most important, potential clients--all the
better to help them in adversity." He took a
pinch of snuff, sneezed. "The Noble House is
the first in Asia, the stuff of legends, so when I
came to Hong Kong I wanted to sift fact from
legend about the Struans, Brocks, the
Americans Cooper and his partner Wilf
Tillman, even the Russian Zergeyev. I
thin--" He stopped. The young man's eyes were
glazed, staring into the distance, not listening, his mind
surely on the solution as it surfaced and filled
his firmament. "Mr. Struan!"
  "Oh, sorry, you were saying?"
  "I'm delighted to present you with your solution,
there are difficulties of course, but you have ships,
they have captains, and captains of a British
ship, in certain situations can perform a
marriage. You are tai-pan so you-can-order-it!
Quod erat demonstrandum."
  "Heavenly you're fantastic," Malcolm
burst out, "fantastic! You're sure, sure about
my mother and father?"
  "Yes. One of my informants was Morley
Skinner, owner of the Oriental Times, a
contemporary of Dirk Struan, an old man
who loved to gossip about the old times, another was
Mrs. Fortheringill before she died, and--have you
noticed how few people are interested in listening to old
people who actually witnessed all kinds of events.
Skinner died about eight years ago, did you know
him?"
  "No." Some of Malcolm's hope
evaporated. "If that story's true, everyone in
Hong Kong would know it."
  "Dirk Struan decided to hush it, decided
a "quiet church wedding" was better face.
He was powerful enough to do that, and even got the
Brocks to agree. It's true."
  "But if he ..." Malcolm stopped--his
face a delight to see. "But true or false
that doesn't matter, does it?"
  "Yes, it does. The truth is vastly
important because it gives you a complete
defense against your mother. After all, you're only
doing what she did, you're following her
example."
  "My God, Heavenly, you're right
again." Then even more excitedly. "Do you have
proof?"
  Of course, silly boy, Skye thought, but you
don't get everything at once. "Yes, in Hong
Kong. I'll need expenses to go there at once
--against my retainer. Shall we say five thousand,
which includes proof ... and always providing my
solution cuts your Gordian knot. By the time you
get there, after the wedding, I'll have all the proof
you'll need."
  "God in Heaven, and I thought I was lost!"
Malcolm sat back in the chair. Now there was
nothing to stop him. And this fact cleared his mind of
many devils, devils of the night and of the day and of the
future. "What other "facts" do you know about
me and the past?"
  "Lots, Mr. Struan," Skye said with a
smile. "But they're not for now, however
precious."

  Malcolm Struan was heading homewards,
happier than he could remember, his sticks or the
pain not bothering him as much as usual.
  And why not? he almost sang. Married next
week to the most beautiful girl ever, Mother finessed
flawlessly--I can't wait to see her face--
I've a party tonight that now will really be a
celebration, and Norbert's back in perfect time
to be sent onwards to meet his Maker,
"Ayeeyah!"
  Jovially he greeted and waved at those who
passed by. He was popular as well as pitied,
respected as tai-pan of the Noble House, and
envied even more as the adored husband-to-be of the
Settlement's darling.
  The sun broke through the clouds to match his
mood, set the sea sparkling, while the fleet
sorted itself out in the bay, Sir William's
tender rowing out to the flagship, the mail ship
clustered with other tenders. Their own merchantman,
Lady Tess, which plied between Yokohama,
Shanghai, Hong Kong, then all the major
ports home to London and back again, was
prepared for sea, outward bound this evening.
  Her captain would do, he thought, Lavidarc
Smith, big and blustery, many years with
Struan's like most of our captains but I've
never liked him much, I'd rather have had old Uncle
Sheely to marry and bless us. Pity I didn't
know what I know now when he was here.
Never mind. Joss! Anyway I can't keep
Lavidarc here and even tomorrow would be impossible, have
to deal with Norbert first.
  What about Vincent Strongbow, off Prancing
Cloud? She arrives Sunday and turns around
for Hong Kong Wednesday. That gives me
plenty of time to kill Norbert and slip aboard
her before Sir William creases me. I
mustn't be delayed here, far safer to be in Hong
Kong where we've real power and Angel ... my
wife by then ... she can follow in two or three
weeks.
  So, everything decided. And Heavenly's right
again: I must be very careful and not tell anyone, not
even Angel, until just before. I can trust him,
he's sworn to secrecy and his fee will be spread
over the year which will ensure I have his devotion.
Ayeeyah, five thousand! Never mind, he's
given me the answer, he's really done it!
Thank God!
  Another decision: I'm going to cut down on
the medicine, even try to cut it out altogether. I've
a duty to Angel to get well and be strong without
props. And be fit to take over the Noble
House. With Angel beside me, I can ...
  Horses trotting past dispelled his reverie.
He waved at the riders and saw that he was near the
church, sun on the steeple, the smell of the sea
and horses and earth and life in his nostrils. In
sudden gratitude he began to go in to say a
prayer of thanks when he noticed their steam
launch heading for their wharf, Jamie in the stern, his
head deep in a newspaper, and that reminded him of
mail. He changed direction and was at the wharf
head just before she came alongside.
  "Jamie!" he called out above the noise of the
engine and waved as she nosed against the timbers,
heavy with seaweed and barnacles. He saw
Jamie squint against the wind, then wave back.
One look at his face was enough. "I'll come
aboard."
  Awkwardly he stepped on deck, difficult
to walk on a sloping surface with two canes,
but he maneuvered his way aft and allowed Jamie
to catch his arm and help him down the three steps
into the cabin. The cabin was spacious and private,
with benches around a sea table, lockers underneath
them. On the table was the mail, in neat bundles,
separated into letters, newspapers, magazines and
books. At once he saw a letter from
his mother atop his pile, her writing so distinctive.
Another letter from her to Jamie was already open on the
table.
  "I'm, I'm glad to see you, Tai-pan."
  "What's up now?"
  "Here, read my letter for yourself."

For your information my son may not marry until
he has attained his majority, under any
circumstance. I have already informed Reverend
Michaelmas Tweet, Sir William (by this
post), and made a careful announcement in this
day's Oriental Times (enclosed). Also
to all our captains of all our ships plying to and
from your waters have been so informed and have ordered them
to spread this information, and also advised Admiral
Ketterer (by this post) in case a captain's
ceremony tempts him. What my son does after
his 21st birthday is of course up to him.
Until that time, before God, I will protect his
interests and ours as best I can.

  The air had rushed out of Malcolm's lungs
and blood from his face. He ripped open his own
letter. It was almost a copy of the other, except
personal and addressed, My dearest son, and
ended,

This is really for your own good, my son. I
regret to say the girl's stock is bad--we have
heard officials in French Indo-China now
pursue her father for fraud, you already know an
Uncle is in Debtor's Prison in Paris.
If you must have her, make her a mistress, much as
I disapprove, but you will only store more trouble for
yourself I am sure. I of course will never meet
her.
  I trust I will have the pleasure of seeing you
before Christmas when this sorry business can be behind
us. I would write about the vile Brocks but that
must be settled here and not in Yokohama. yr
loving mother.

The "P.s. I love you" was there so no
secret message.
  Slowly he tore the letter into pieces. This
control pleased him, but did not take away the
fury that she had checkmated him. "That woman,"
he muttered, unaware he was speaking aloud, "that
woman's a hag ... a
devil-spawned hag, a witch, how could she
possibly know ..."
  McFay watched and waited, gravely
concerned.
  When he could think straight, Malcolm said.
"What's in the paper?" The article was brief:

Mrs. Tess Struan, acting head of
Struan's, announced today that the Noble House would
host a major celebration on the occasion of the
21st birthday her eldest son, Malcolm, and
his formal elevation to tai-pan on May 21/,
next year.

  "Well, Jamie," he said with a bitter
smile. "Not much more she can do to undermine me, is
there?"
  "No," Jamie said, his heart going out to him.
  Malcolm saw the ships and horizon and beyond that
Hong Kong and the Peak and all his friends there, and
enemies. Now she was atop the list. "It's
funny in a way. A few moments ago I was
riding a crest ..." Dully he told Jamie
about his great idea, about Tweet's turn-down, and
all about Heavenly's marvelous scheme. "That's
garbage now."
  Jamie was as much in shock as Malcolm. He
could not seem to get his mind working. "Perhaps, perhaps
Tweet could be persuaded. Perhaps a contribution
to the Ch--"
  "He turned that down. So did Father Leo."
  "Jesus Christ, you asked him too?"
  Malcolm related that meeting, shocking
Jamie even more.
  "God Almighty, Tai-pan, if you're so
set on it to go to those lengths ... perhaps ...
we'll find another captain."
  "Not much chance of that, Jamie. Anyway
Heavenly stressed to keep it quiet until it was
over, particularly Sir William who could
forbid it as Angelique and I are under age. And
if she put him on formal notice, he'll have
to tell Seratard. She's won ... God
curse her!"
  Again he put his eyes on to the horizon. In
the past when a catastrophe happened, when the
twins drowned for example--while she never said it
directly, he always thought that she blamed him, if
he'd been there somehow it would not have happened--he
would feel the tears welling, like now, but
would force them back and that would make the hurt
worse and the sick feeling terrible. He did that
because "A tai-pan never cries." She had
always drummed it into him. It was the first thing he could
remember her saying, "The tai-pan never
cries, he's above that, he fights on, like
Dirk, he never cries, he bears the
burden," repeating it again and again though tears always
came easily to his father.
  I never realized what contempt she had for him.
  She never cried, never once that I can
remember.
  I'm not going to cry. I will bear the burden.
I swore I'd be worthy of the tai-pan and I
will. Never again will she be "mother" to me. Never.
Tess. Yes, Tess, I will bear it.
  His eyes focused on Jamie, feeling so
old, and so lonely. "Let's get ashore."
  Jamie started to say something, stopped. His
face was strange. Then he pointed to the seat
opposite. More packets of mail there.
  "What is it?"
  "That's ... that's Wee Willie's mail.
Bertram, the Legation's new dogsbody, was
sick so I said I'd ... I'd fetch their
mail for them." Jamie's fingers were as shaky as his
voice. He picked up the large bundle of
letters. Its crisscrossed string was
government-sealed in the center but it was still easy
to leaf through the corners and find her two letters.
To Sir William and Admiral Ketterer.
"We, with a little time, and, and luck you could, I, I
might be able to, to get them out."
  The hair at the nape of Malcolm's head
seemed to stiffen. To rob the Royal Mail was a
hanging offense.

                 

  The two men stared at the bundle of letters, in
turmoil, consumed with dread. The cabin was
claustrophobic. Malcolm said nothing and
watched Jamie who was silent, both of them
drained. Then, making the decision for him,
Jamie's shaky fingers ripped at the string but this
galvanized Malcolm into his own decision and
he reached over and grabbed the bundle and stopped
him. "No, Jamie, you mustn't."
  "It's the, the only way, Tai-pan."
  "No it isn't." Malcolm
straightened the string, relieved the seal was not
broken, then smoothed the letters out and put them back
on the other pile, the touch of them hateful.
"It's just not right," he said, his voice as weak as
his knees, despising his weakness--was it weakness?
"I'd never forgive myself if you ... if you were
caught and, and well I just don't have the courage
--apart from that it's not right."
  Jamie's face was wet with sweat. "Right or
not, no one's to know. If we don't, you've no
chance. Maybe we can find a captain--even
Brock's, they've a ship next week."
  Malcolm shook his head, his mind blank. A
wave rocked the launch against the pilings,
screeching the rope fenders. With an effort he
forced himself to concentrate. All his life, whenever
he was in quandary, he would ask himself what Dirk
Struan, the tai-pan, would do--but never a real
answer came forth.
  At length, so wearily he said, "What would
he do, Jamie? Dirk Struan?"
  At once Jamie's memory took him to that
devil-may-care giant of a man, the few times
he had seen him, or been in his company for a few
minutes--he himself so junior and just arrived.
"He'd ..." After a moment, a smile began.
"He'd ... Dirk would ... yes, that's it. I
think he would order us and the Bosun ashore and
take the launch out himself "to test her as something
feels amiss," and then ... then when he was
well away and in deep water, he would calmly
open the sea cocks and, while she filled, he
would make sure all this mail was well weighed and
could not float free, then he'd go to the stern and
light a cheroot and wait till she sank and
swim ashore. Had he interfered with the mails?
"Perish that thought, laddie."" Jamie's beam
became seraphic. "Why not?"
  Before Tokaid@o Malcolm was a strong
swimmer. Now he knew he would sink like an
anchor. "I'd never make it ashore."
  "I could, easily, Tai-pan."
  "Yes, but this isn't your problem, Jamie, and
even if you did, it would only buy me a week
or so and that's no good. Joss. We can't
interfere with the Royal Mail. Let's agree
to forget this happened. Eh?" He held out his hand.
"You're a real friend, best I've ever had.
Sorry I was rotten to you."
  Jamie shook warmly. "You
weren't, I deserved what you said. No harm's
done. Tai-pan ... please, it would be easy."
  "Thanks but no." For the ten thousandth time,
Malcolm knew he was not Dirk Struan and could
never do what the tai-pan could do, in this case either
blatantly remove the letters or sink them. Before
Tokaid@o, perhaps I would have dared, but now ...
now it's fifty times worse. Tokaid@o,
always Tokaid@o, he thought, the word branded
into his mind, so frustrated he could scream. "I
have to face it alone."
  He hobbled ashore and went to his own suite.
The small bottle was full but he took none of
it, firmly putting it back into the drawer.
Painfully he pulled his chair nearer to the window
and sank into it with relief.
  I'm going to win, he promised himself. Please
God, help me. I don't know how but I'm
going to win Angelique, I'm going to conquer the
pain, the opium, the Tokaid@o, Tess, and
I am going to win ...
  His sleep was deep and restful. When he
awoke Angelique was there, seated near and
smiling at him.
  "Good afternoon, darling, my, but you slept well.
It's almost time to change for the party!" Her eyes were
sparkling. She came and kissed him and knelt beside
him. "How are you?"
  "Seeing you makes me so happy." His voice
was filled with love but it did not hide his inner
worry.
  That decided her. It was important to take
him out of his usual seriousness so he would enjoy
tonight's party he had promised was a celebration.
"I've a surprise for you," she said,
mischievously.
  "What?"
  She scrambled to her feet and began to twirl as
though dancing, her afternoon dress sibilant.
Suddenly she chuckled and called out, "Look!"
and lifted her skirts and petticoats, revealing
the long length of her perfect legs enhanced
by silk stockings, saucy garters under her knees,
and garter belt and multilayered frilly
panties. He had been expecting the
traditional, all-concealing pantaloons. The
sight of her took his breath away.
  "Christ Almighty ..." he spluttered.
  "It's for your pleasure, only, my darling,"
she said, flushed at her daring, laughing
at his color, then coquettishly raised her
skirts over her head for an instant, letting them
fall as suddenly, and fanned herself, saying
breathlessly, "It's the latest fashion, no more
pantaloons! Pantaloons are finished. The
columnist of Le Figaro says nowadays some
of the most famous ladies of Paris don't even
wear panties at the Op@era--on special
occasions--for the secret pleasure of their lovers."
  "Don't you dare," he said, laughing with her,
swept up in her exuberance. He caught her hand
and settled her into his lap. "The thought would
drive me wild."
  She buried her head in his shoulder, pleased that
her stratagem had worked. "I think I'll
whisper in your ear during dinner, sometimes, or when
we're dancing, that I've forgotten them--just
to tease my Prince Charming, but only when we're
married and to amuse. You don't mind, ch@eri,
do you--the new fashion, no pantaloons?"
  "Of course not," he said, man-of-the-world,
secretly not. "If it's fashion, then it's
fashion."
  "You said tonight's party was to be a celebration?"
  Most of his lightness left him. "Yes, yes
it was. But ... be patient with me, Angel.
In a few days I'll be able to tell you the real
reason--I just have to delay a little. In the meantime,
know that I love you love you love you ..."

  In the evening the weather became changeable but it
did not dampen the spirit of Malcolm's party. The
main Struan dining room had been built for this
purpose and dwarfed the rest of the Settlement's
private facilities except for the Club.
Sparkling silver, crystal glasses, the finest
Peking china, the thirty-odd guests in evening
dress or dress uniforms. Hoag had declined
as he had a fever.
  Dinner was immense as usual and at length
over. Now to roars of approval, the long table was
set against the wall--a rare occurrence but almost
obligatory whenever Angelique was present,
all guests wanting to dance with her. Except
Jamie--but only tonight. By prior agreement with
Malcolm, Jamie had quietly left during
the mayhem of moving the table; "Sorry, but I
don't feel much like dancing, I'll slip out,
Tai-pan."
  "We both swore to forget about the
launch today."
  "It's not that, just want to collect my
wits."
  Tonight Angelique was the only lady present,
the other two, like Hoag, were regretfully sick,
and she was squired to the heating tempos of
waltzes, polkas played by Andr`e Poncin on
a grand piano, imported to huge applause in
the spring. One dance per guest was the rule, she was
allowed to rest after four dances and to stop whenever she
wished. Her face was glowing and she wore a new
crinoline of red and green silk, but without the full
hoops of a crinoline, that dramatized her wasp
waist and swelling bosom, her nipples minimally
covered in the fashion decreed by Paris,
deplored by absent clergy, and devoured by every man
in the room.
  "Enough, mes amis," she said after an hour
to groans and pleading from those who had not had a dance,
and she went back to Malcolm, fanning herself and
exhilarated.
  He was in a great, carved oak chair at the
head of the table, gentled by wine and brandy. He
enjoyed watching her as much as any although, as always,
deeply frustrated that he had not claimed the first
dance, or would not claim the last as was his right.
Normally he was an accomplished dancer.
  She settled herself on the arm of his chair. His
arm went lightly around her waist, hers rested on
his shoulders.
  "You dance marvelously, Angel."
  "None of them are as good as you," she whispered.
"That's what first attracted me to you and, Prince
Charm--"
  Cheers of anticipation stopped her. To her
embarrassment and chagrin, Andr`e's fingers began
the first, slow seductive chords of the cancan.
Not a little annoyed, Angelique shook her
head, and did not move.
  To her surprise, and roars of delight,
Pallidar and Marlowe took center stage,
towels wrapped around their uniforms as skirts, the
rollicking music picked up tempo and the two of
them began hilariously to parody the dance that
scandalized the civilized world, outside of
Paris, faster and faster, lifting their pretend
skirts higher and higher, high kicking to more cheers
and jeers and roars, every table thumping to the beat,
faster and faster until the two men, red-faced and
sweating in their tight uniforms, tried
valiant splits and collapsed in a heap
to tumultuous cheers and shouts of "encore,
encore," the applause deafening.
  Laughing with all of them, Malcolm
graciously released her and she went over and
helped them up, congratulating and praising their
efforts.
  Pallidar was panting and pretended a groan.
"I think I've put my back out for good."
  "Champagne for the Army, and rum for the Navy,"
she called out, linked arms with both of them and brought
them back to Malcolm for more praise, smiling at
him. "Not for me the cancan, eh, darling?"
  "That would be too much."
  "My word yes," Marlowe said.
  "Yes," Malcolm said, sharing the secret
smile with her, nicely titillated.

  When Andr`e began playing again, he chose a
waltz. It was just enough to show her ankles as she
swayed but not enough to reveal the daring lack of
pantaloons. He had shown her the article in
Le Figaro, encouraged her and shared the
secret. All evening he had watched her and those
fawning on her--Babcott towering over all the
others, then resplendent Pallidar and Marlowe
trying to ease him out of the inner circle--relishing
his secrets and, for the moment, the life within a life
that he led. Angelique was dancing with Sir
William. Laughing to himself he let his mind
drift as his fingers played. What would they all do
if they knew what I know. About the earrings, the
abortion, and how I disposed of the evidence? They'd
turn from her as if she were a leper, all of them,
including lovesick Struan, he more than any.
  If things were different and I was in Paris with
her, backed by Noble House power and money and an
adoring but invalid husband, what secrets I
could obtain! She'd require expert training in
the more feminine and not so gentle arts, her claws
would need honing but then she would be a classic,
any salon and any bed would welcome her, and
once she had a taste of the Great Game this oh so
cunning little chicken would feed on it with gusto.
  And into my bed? Now or later, certainly, if
I wanted to turn the screws, but I no longer
want her and will not take her, except for
revenge. She's much more amusing as a toy and
there's little enough in this world to amuse ...
  "Wonderful idea, Andr`e!"
Phillip Tyrer was beaming down at him.
"Settry said you cooked the whole thing up with
them."
  "What?"
  "The cancan!"
  "Ah yes," Andr`e said. His fingers continued
with the waltz, then ended it. "Time for a break,
let's have a drink," he said, deciding that now,
being almost public, would be a perfect time to bring
Tyrer to heel. "I hear a certain lady's
contract is worth a Minister's salary," he
said in French and saw Tyrer's face redden with
embarrassment and look around. "My God, as
though I'd be so indiscreet. Phillip,
don't worry, my friend, I have your interests in
mind." He smiled, remembering their encounter at
the Yedo Castle. "Affairs of the heart have nothing
to do with affairs of State, though I believe
France should share the spoils of the earth with Great
Britain, no?"
  "I ... I agree, Andr`e. Yes, I
... the negotiations are not so good I'm afraid,
yes, at a standstill."
  "Better to speak French, eh?"
  "Yes, yes you're right." Tyrer used his
handkerchief as a dandy would to wipe away a sudden
sweat. "Never thought it would be so difficult."
  Andr`e beckoned him closer. "Listen, I can
tell you how to fix that: don't see her tonight even
though you've an assignation for the night." He almost
laughed aloud as Tyrer's mouth dropped open.
"How many times have I told you there are few
secrets here. Perhaps I can help ... if you
need help."
  "Oh yes, yes I do I, yes please."
  "Then ..."
  Both of them glanced at a roulette table that
had been set up the other end of the room, where there
was a burst of laughter and clapping as
Angelique won on double zero--no gambling for
money tonight, just worthless, bronze Chinese coins
called small cash. Vargas acted as croupier.
  Tyrer sighed. "Lucky at gambling and
lucky in love."
  "She works at it," Andr`e said thinly,
irritated with her, "so should you. Listen, break
tonight's rendezvous with Fujiko, oh I know
Raiko's set it up especially at your pleading
--Raiko didn't tell me by the way, it was one
of her maids. Don't go, and don't
send word that you're not going, just go to another Inn,
say the Inn of the Lily, take any girl there,
their prettiest is one called Yuko."
  "But Andr`e I don't wan--"
  "If you don't want to bed her, just make her
please you in other ways, or get drunk, or
pretend to get drunk, believe me you won't be
wasting your money. Tomorrow, when Nakama mentions
Fujiko, or anything about the contract or
Raiko, act offhand, and tomorrow night, repeat the
performance."
  "But ..."
  "Anytime Nakama mentions anything, act
casual, say nothing other than that the Inn of the
Lily was many times more promising, telling him
sharply not to mention it again, particularly to Raiko.
All right so far?"
  "Yes but don't you think--"
  "No, unless you want to be driven mad, and not
have Fujiko at a relatively reasonable
price--you're going to get stuck anyway,
Phillip, but never mind, it's not fair you should be
beggared, it's a matter of face. Do not
discuss this plan with Nakama, and keep the
pattern up for a week at least."
  "My God, Andr`e, a week?"
  "Three would be better, old friend." Andr`e was
amused at Tyrer's miserable countenance. "I'm
not only saving you enormous money but an ocean of
aggravation. It's important you act as if you
couldn't care less, that you were pissed at the
delays and breaking appointments and Raiko's
outrageous asking price--particularly to an
important official like you! That's a good thing
to throw at Nakama once or twice. But not more,
he's a sharp fellow, no?"
  "Yes, yes he is, and very knowledgeable."
  Yes, Andr`e thought, and soon it will be time
to share all of it with me, both what he's told you
and what I have gleaned for myself. Interesting that he
speaks English--thank God my spies have their
ears open as well as their eyes. That explains a
lot, though I don't know why he won't speak
English to me or even Japanese whenever I've
caught him alone. I suppose because Willie
ordered him not to.
  "Now," he continued quietly, "Raiko will
ask me a dozen times to intercede and arrange a
rendezvous. After a week I'll reluctantly
agree. Don't let Nakama do it
or let him in on the game and when you see
Raiko, act tough, and with Fujiko. You've got
to be very convincing, Phillip."
  "But ..."
  "Tell Raiko she was correct to consider her
client's interests, yours, first--particularly as
you are an important official, harp on
that--giving you time to consider the matter carefully.
You quite agree it's better to be prudent, that
buying "the woman's" contract now is not a good
idea. Use that term and not Fujiko by name--
don't forget from their point of view you're only
discussing a piece of merchandise at this stage, not
the lady you adore. Thank Raiko, and say with
her help you have thought carefully and believe buying
a contract would be a mistake. You'll just hire
"the woman's" services from time to time, and if
"the woman" is busy, shigata ga nai
--it doesn't matter--life's too short,
etc."
  Tyrer had listened attentively and knew that
Andr`e was right and groaned at the thought of not seeing
Fujiko for a week, already imagining her suffering
under the hulk of every gai-jin in Yokohama. "I
... I agree with what you say but, but I
don't, I don't think I can do it, I mean the
acting."
  "You have to and why not? They're acting all the time,
all the time! Haven't you noticed they live
lies as the truth and the truth as lies? Women have
no option, especially in the Floating World.
Men? They're worse. Remember the Bakufu,
the Council of Elders, what about them and what about
Nakama, especially Nakama? They're past
masters at the game, and that's all it is. Why be
a pigeon, why let Raiko humble you and at the
same time thrust gold you can't afford--can never
afford--into her hands just because you are trying to assuage
a never-ending ache that God implanted in us."
  Andr`e shivered. He knew the trap too
well. He was in it. Raiko had pressed him
far beyond his own financial limit. That's not
true, he told himself irritably. It's all
right to twist the truth and lie with other people but don't
do it with yourself, your secret self, or you are
lost. The truth is I rushed to the limit and beyond,
gladly. Seventeen days ago.
  The instant Raiko first introduced me to the
girl ...
  The instant I saw her, she of the
raven hair and alabaster skin and alluring eyes,
I knew I would give Raiko my soul and
walk into the Everlasting Pit to possess her.
Me, Andr`e Edouard Poncin, servant of
France, spymaster, killer, expert on the
vileness of human nature, me the great cynic,
in an instant I had fallen in love. Madness!
But true.
  The instant the girl had left the room, me
helpless and tongue-tied, I said, "Raiko,
please. Whatever ask, I pay."
  "So sorry, Furansu-san, this matter will
cost more money than I care to mention, even if she
agrees to be with you--she has not yet agreed."
  "Whatever money, I pay. Please ask,
ask if agrees."
  "Of course. Please come back tomorrow, at
dusk."
  "No. Please. Now ask--ask now, I
wait."
  He had had to wait almost two hours. While
he waited he fretted and prayed and hoped and
died and died again. When Raiko returned and he
saw her set face, he began to die once more but
rushed to life as she said, "Her name is
Hinodeh, meaning Sunrise. She is
twenty-two and she says, yes, but there are
conditions. Apart from money."
  "Whatever Hinodeh want."
  "Best to listen first." Raiko was more somber
than he had ever seen her. "Hinodeh says she
will be your consort, not courtesan, for a year and a
day. If on that last day she decides to remain
with you, she will give you her inochi, her spirit, and
be with you for another year, and another, year by year
until she decides to leave or you tire of her.
If she wishes to leave, you swear to release her
freely."
  "Agreed. When begin?"'
  "Wait, Furansu-san, there's much more.
There will be no mirrors in your house, and you will
bring none into it. When she disrobes, the room will
always be dark--except once, the first time. Only
once, Furansu-san, you may see her.
Next, the moment any ... any disfiguring mark
appears, or whenever she may ask you, without
hesitation you will bow to her and bless her, and be her
witness and give her the poison cup, or
knife, and watch and wait until she is dead
to honor her sacrifice."
  His mind spun out of control. "Dead?"'
  "She said she would prefer the knife but did not
know a gai-jin's choice."
  When he could get his brain working, he said,
"I, I the judge if, if mark disfiguring?"'
  Raiko shrugged. "You or she, it does not
matter. If she decides to ask, then you must
honor your promise. It will all be written
into the contract. You agree?"'
  After he had sifted that, the horror of it, and
made peace with it, he said, "Then sickness her
early, no mark yet?"'
  Raiko's eyes were unrelenting, her voice so
gentle, so terribly final, the stillness in her
room so vast. "Hinodeh has no disease,
Furansu-san, none. She is blemishless."
  His head seemed to explode with "she is
blemishless" echoing in the sky of his mind together with
his all pervading shriek to himself "but you're
Unclean!"
  "Why? Why agree? Why? Why she ...
she know, know my, my bad. Yes?"'
  A maid, waiting on the veranda outside,
frightened by his bellowing voice, pulled the shoji
open. Then, waved away by Raiko, obediently
closed it again. Delicately Raiko sipped
her sak`e. "Of course she knows,
Furansu-san. So sorry."
  He wiped the saliva from the corners of his
mouth. "Then why ... agree?"'
  Again the strangeness. "Hinodeh will not tell
me, so sorry. It is part of my agreement with
her that I do not press her to know, as it must be part
of your agreement with her. We are not to press her,
she says she will tell in her own time." Raiko
had exhaled heavily. "So sorry, but you must
agree as part of the contract. That is the final
condition."
  "Agreed. Please make contract ..."
  After an agony of time--only a few days--it
had been signed and sealed and he went with
Hinodeh, him unClean and her Clean, in all
her glory, and tomorrow he would again ...
  Andr`e almost leapt out of himself as a hand grasped
his shoulder and he found himself back in Struan's
great room. It was Phillip saying, "Andr`e,
are you all right?"
  "What? Oh, oh yes ..." Andr`e's heart
was palpitating, cold sweat making his flesh
crawl, that and the memory of
"Blemishless" and "First Time" and the horror
of it--and dreading tomorrow. "Sorry, I ... a cat
was walking on my grave." All at once the
room pressed down on him and he had to get out
into the air. He got up, groped away,
mumbling, "Ask ... ask Henri to play, I
... I don't feel ... sorry, have to leave
..."
  Blankly, Tyrer stared after him. Babcott
wandered over from the roulette wheel. "What's up
with him? Poor fellow looks as though he's seen
a ghost."
  "Don't know, George. One moment he was
all right, the next, mumbling and white as a
sheet, sweat pouring off him."
  "Was it anything you were talking about?"
  "Don't think so, he was just advising me what
to do about Fujiko and Raiko, nothing about him at
all." They watched Andr`e leave as though the
room were empty.
  Babcott frowned. "Not like him, he's usually
so debonaire." Poor chap, must be his
affliction--wish to God I could supply a
cure, wish to God there was a cure.
  "Talking about debonaire," Tyrer was saying,
"I didn't know you were such an accomplished
dancer."
  "Nor did I," the giant said with a booming
laugh. "I was inspired, she'd inspire anyone.
Normally I dance like a rhino." They looked
across at her. "Extraordinary constitution that
girl, and wonderful, infectious laugh."
  "Yes, Malcolm's a lucky fellow.
'cuse me, I'd best ask Henri to sub for
Andr`e ..." He wandered off.
  Babcott watched Angelique. Curious that
a doctor can examine a patient and not be aroused,
he thought, even with someone like her. I wasn't, the
times she consulted me at Kanagawa or here,
though there was never any intimate examination, never
a need except for the unusual heaviness of her
period, a few weeks ago, when a careful
examination was clearly necessary, though she never allowed
it. I'd never seen her so pale or her lips so
bloodless. Come to think of it, she acted
strangely, wouldn't let me near her, just let
me into her room briefly, almost as a stranger,
when the evening before--the time I returned her
crucifix--I had listened to her heart, tapped
her chest and back and stomach and she had
behaved like a normal patient. I remember her
pulse was quite agitated, for no apparent reason.
Curious behavior.
  Have I missed something? he asked himself, watching
her at the roulette table, bubbling with life,
clapping her hands with childlike glee when she
won Red or Black, Zergeyev and others
teaching her the finer arts of gambling. Strange she
doesn't wear her cross as most Catholics
would, especially as it was a gift from her adored
mother.

  "Grand party, Malcolm," Sir William
said, coming up to him, stifling a yawn. "Time for me
to turn in."
  "Another brandy?" Malcolm was sitting near
the inglenook fireplace, the fire down
to embers now.
  "No thanks, my back teeth are awash.
Great lady, Malcolm, great sport."
  "Yes," he agreed proudly, mellowed by the
wine and brandies that deadened the pain and calmed his
fluttering panic for the future. Not as strongly as
the medicine, he thought. Never mind, it's a
beginning.
  "Well, good night." Sir William
stretched. "Oh by the way," he said, his voice
easy, "could you drop by sometime tomorrow, any time that
suits."
  Malcolm looked up sharply, the thought of his
mother's letter putting ice into his stomach again.
"Say eleven?"
  "Perfect, any time. If you want to change
it, fine."
  "No, at eleven. About what, Sir
William?"
  "It can wait, nothing that can't wait."
  "About what, Sir William?" He saw
pity in the eyes studying him, perhaps compassion. His
discomfort increased. "It's about my mother's letter,
isn't it--she said she was writing to you by today's
mail."
  "Yes it was, but only partially, I had been
warned to expect a letter. The first matter was
Norbert, now that he's back. I hope this
duel nonsense is out of both your heads."
  "Of course."
  Sir William grunted, unconvinced, but
let it rest. He could do no more than warn both
parties and then, if they proceeded,
to enforce the law. "You're both warned."
  "Thank you. Second?"
  "Second was that I have been informed officially
of the Government's plan to outlaw all trade in
opium by British nationals, to forbid the trade in
all British ships, to destroy our Bengal
opium plantations and replant with tea. As you
had led the delegation to ask and complain about the
rumors I wanted you to be the first to know."
  "That will ruin our Asian trade, our China
trade, and completely upset the British
economy."
  "In the short run it will certainly cause a
major problem for the Exchequer but it is the only
moral course. Should have been done years ago.
Of course I understand the unsolvable
silver-opium-tea triangle and the chaos of lost
revenue it will cause the Exchequer." Sir
William blew his nose, already weary of the
problem that had harassed and aggravated the Foreign
Office for years. "Think I'm getting a
cold. I suggest you convene a meeting next
week to see how we can minimize the confusion."
  "I'll arrange it."
  "Growing our own tea is a good idea,
Malcolm," Sir William said. "Marvelous
idea! It might interest you to know the first Bengal
test plantations producing crops were grown from
seeds smuggled out of China and brought back to Kew
Gardens by Sir William Longstaff, Hong
Kong's governor in your grandfather's day, when he
returned home."
  "Yes, I know, we've even tasted the tea,
it's bitter and black with none of the delicacy of
China, even Japanese tea," Malcolm said,
impatiently. Tea could certainly wait until
tomorrow. "Next?"
  "Last, your mother's letter," Sir William
added, more formally. "It's not the policy of Her
Majesty's Government, or her officials,
to interfere with the private life of her citizens.
However, your mother points out you are a minor, she
is your surviving parent and legal guardian. I
am obliged not to approve any marriage without the
legal guardian's consent, in this case of both
parties. Sorry but that's the law."
  "Laws are made to be bent."
  "Some laws, Malcolm," Sir William
said kindly. "Listen, I don't know what the
problem is between you and your mother, nor do
I wish to know--she did draw my attention to the
piece in the Times which can be read in several
ways, not all of them good. When you are back in
Hong Kong I'm sure you can bring her to your
side, and in any event, you are of age in May
which isn't far away."
  "Wrong, Sir William," he said,
remembering the same advice from Gordon Chen--
advice from men who don't know what love is,
he thought without malice, just sorry for them. "It's
a million years away."
  "Well, be that as it may. I'm sure it will
all work out for you both. Henri's of the same
opinion."
  "You've discussed the matter with him?"
  "Privately of course. The French consul in
Hong Kong is, er, aware of Angelique and
her affection for you, your mutual affection. She's
a wonderful person, she'll make a wonderful
wife, whatever the problem with her father."
  Malcolm reddened. "You know about him too?"
  The lines in Sir William's face etched
deeper. "French officials in Siam are most
concerned," he said delicately. "Naturally they
informed Henri, who rightly informed me, asking our
assistance. Sorry, but it is an official
matter of interest. You must be aware that, in fact,
anything to do with the Noble House is a matter of
interest," adding sadly, for he liked Malcolm
and regretted the Tokaid@o as barbarism. "The
price of fame, eh?"
  "If, if you hear anything I would
appreciate hearing first, privately, as, as
quickly as possible."
  "Yes, I can keep you informed.
Privately."
  Malcolm reached for the brandy bottle. "Sure
you won't?"
  "No thanks."
  "Is there an answer to my problem?"
  "I've given it to you." Sir William
kept his voice formal to hide a sudden wave of
irritation. As if a few months really
mattered, the girl's not dead as Vertinskya's
dead, nor anywhere near as marvelous! "Your
birthday's soon and Hong Kong only eight or
nine days away. Of course you're welcome at
eleven tomorrow, or any time, but that's all that I
wanted to chat about. 'night, Malcolm and thanks
again for the party."

  It was past midnight. Malcolm and
Angelique were kissing passionately in the
corridor outside their adjoining suites. The
corridor was dark, just a few night lights.
She was trying to hold back but she was enjoying him,
more every day, his heat warming her more than yesterday--tonight
his need, and hers, almost crushing. "Je
t'aime," she murmured, meaning it.
  "Je t'aime aussi, Angel."
  She kissed him again, searching, then again stumbled
back from the brink, and held on to him until she
caught her breath. "Je t'aime, and it was such
a lovely party."
  "You were like champagne."
  She kissed his ear, her arms around him. Before
Tokaid@o she would have to stand on tiptoe. She
did not notice it though he did. "I'm so
sorry we sleep alone."
  "Me too. Not long now," he said.
Abruptly his pain soared but he bore it a
fraction longer. "So," he said, looking at her
deeply. "Sleep well, my darling."
  They touched lips and murmured good night, many
times, then she was gone. Her bolt slid home.
He picked up his sticks and dragged himself into his
own rooms, happy and sad and worried and not
worried at all. The evening had been a
success, Angelique had been content, his
guests had enjoyed themselves, he had contained his
disappointment over the wreckage of his plan, and
he had faced himself over the mails, not allowing
Jamie to decide for him.
  That decision was right, he thought, though Dirk's
would have been better. Never mind, I can never be
him, but he's dead and I'm alive, and Heavenly
has promised to devise a solution to her letters
and the new twist in my joss: "There must be an
answer, Tai-pan," Heavenly had said, "there
must be an answer. I'll come up with something before
I leave for Hong Kong, you'll need that proof
whatever happens."
  His eyes went to their communicating door, still
bolted permanently at night by mutual consent.
I won't think about Angelique or the bolt
or that she's alone. Nor about my failure over
our marriage. I made that promise early and
I'll keep it. Tomorrow will take care of tomorrow.
  The usual half carafe of wine was on the
bedside table, with some fruit--lycee
and mangoes from Nagasaki--English cheese,
cold tea that he always drank instead of water, a
glass and the small bottle. The bed was turned
down, his sleeping gown laid out. The door
swung open. "Hello, Tai-pan."
  It was Chen, his Number One Boy, with his
wide, toothed beam that always pleased him--Chen had
looked after him as long as he could remember, as
Ah Tok had been his amah, both totally
loyal, completely possessive, and always at
loggerheads. He was squat and very strong, his
pigtail luxurious, his face round with a
permanent smile though the eyes did not always.
"Your feast was worthy of Emperor Kung."
  "Ayeeyah," Malcolm said sourly at
once, knowing what the old man meant. "May the
great cow urinate on your immediate generations. Get
on with your work and keep your opinions to yourself and
don't act as though you were born under the sign of the
Monkey." This was the Zodiac sign for clever
people.
  Chen's seeming pleasantry, like most in
Chinese, had many meanings: Emperor Kung who
ruled China almost four millennia ago, was
famous for three things: his epicurean tastes, the
lavish banquets he staged, and for his "book."
  In those days there were no books as such, only
scrolls. He had filled a scroll with a
detailed treatise, the first "pillow book"
ever, the source of all others that, by definition,
dealt with the joinings of man and woman in all their
possibilities and hazards, how to improve the
climactic moment, names for the various positions and
their minutiae, descriptions of devices,
medicines, techniques--deep thrusts and shallow
--how to choose the perfect physical partner,
amongst other wisdoms saying,

... obviously, a man whose One-eyed Monk
has the misfortune to be small should not be
embattled with Jade Gate like that of a mare.
  Let it be known for all time, the gods have
decreed that those parts though appearing the same are
never the same but vary greatly. Extreme care
must be used to avoid the trap of the gods who,
while bequeathing man the means, as well as a need
as strong and as permanent as the needle that seeks the
North Star, to taste Heaven while on Earth--the
moment of the Clouds and the Rain is such--at the
same time, for their own amusement, they have
set manifold obstacles in the way of the
Yang's quest for the Yin, some easy to avoid,
most impossible, all complex. As man should
taste as much of Heaven while on Earth as he
can--who knows if gods are really gods--the tao,
the Path to the Gorgeous Gully must be
scrutinized, examined, pursued and studied even
more severely than the transmutation of lead
into gold. ...

  Chen bustled about the room, pained though pleased
with his Master's knowledge. He was only doing his duty,
drawing attention to the strength of the Yin,
particularly tonight, the flaunting of it, her dancing
and kissing, titillating the Master's Yang about
which the Emperor had been very specific: A
nervous and unrequited Yang in any
household, if it be the Master's, will upset the
whole household, therefore all the household should
make every effort to relieve the unrelieved.
  And our house is in turmoil, he thought
disgustedly. Ah Tok is more difficult than
ever, Ah Soh grumbling about the extra work and
worry, the cooks complaining about his loss of
appetite, the houseboys moaning that nothing
pleases him, and all because this cowlike barbarian
whore won't just do her duty. General opinion
amongst the staff was that she must have one of those
Rapacious Ravines Emperor Kung warned
against:

There are some the gods have lined with demons, their
magnetic force so strong as to send men mad, and
make them forget an immortal truth that one Yin
is like another when the need is great, and worse,
when at last one such Ravine opens to receive the
Yang, this Heaven becomes Hell for there is
never enough.

  "Ayeeyah, Tai-pan," Chen said, aiding
him to undress. "This person was only saying your
banquet pleased everyone."
  "Your Lord and Master knows exactly what you were
saying." Malcolm struggled out of his shirt. His
uncle, Gordon Chen, whom he treasured, had
lectured him about the Emperor Kung's work,
telling him this information, and other pieces of
important knowledge about the Yang and Yin, was just between
them and to be kept secret from his mother.
  "You are an impertinent bugger,"
Malcolm said in English, his main defense with
both Chen and Ah Tok. He could never seem
to best them in Cantonese, but speaking English
to them infuriated them. "And I know you were trying
to be snide about the Mistress, but you'd better
stop, by God."
  The round face twisted. "Tai-pan," Chen
said, in his best Cantonese, helping him into bed,
"this person has only the interests of his Master
before all else."
  "Ayeeyah!" Malcolm scoffed. "Words from
a forked tongue are as precious as mildew fish
bones to a starving man." He noticed an
envelope propped on the bureau. "What's that?"
  Chen hurried to fetch it, happy that the
subject had changed from him. "A foreign devil
arrived tonight to see you. Our shroff Vargas saw
him. The foreign devil said the letter was urgent so the
shroff asked this person to put it here in case our
Illustrious Master wanted it."
  The writing was not familiar. "Which foreign
devil?"
  "I don't know, Tai-pan. Is there anything
else?"
  Malcolm shook his head, yawned and put the
envelope on the side table and dismissed him. The
medicine bottle beckoned. "I won't," he
said firmly, started to turn down the oil flame,
then changed his mind and opened the letter with sudden
expectation, thinking it was from Heavenly, or even
Father Leo.

  Dear Mr. Struan: Perhaps I may
introduce myself, Edward Gornt of
Rothwell's, Shanghai, late of Virginia,
presently here in Yokohama for training with Mr.
Norbert Greyforth at the request of Sir
Morgan Brock.
  Mr. Greyforth has asked me to act as his
second in the private, though pressing matter
of the duel you challenged him to. Perhaps I could
wait upon you tomorrow? Would the morning be convenient,
say noon or thereabouts? I have the honor to be,
Sir, your most obedient servant, Edward
Gornt.

  The signature was as neat as the copperplate
writing.

                                 
                 

    Tuesday, 2nd December:
  "'Morning, Mr. Gornt. May I
introduce Mr. McFay, chief of
Struan's, Japan. Please make yourself
comfortable--Jamie, you too. Coffee, tea,
sherry, champagne?"
  "Nothing thank you, Mr. Struan."
  "Mr. McFay's one of my seconds.
Details are supposed to be arranged
by seconds, I believe. Yes?"
  "Yes, suh. I've met Mr. Syborodin
but didn't discuss anything with him, according to Mr.
Greyforth's wishes."
  The two young men studied each other. From the first
instant both had experienced the same strange
sensation: an intense attraction to the other. Each
was thinking, How odd you could instantly like some people, for
no apparent reason, while disliking others,
loathing some, dismissing many. Even so, both were
sure that however fierce their initial affinity, it
would make no difference. Soon--today, tomorrow, even
in the next few minutes--something would as quickly
revert them to normality, to the comfortable historic
enmity that bound their firms together and would reach down the
ages, dismissing the first affinity as a peculiar
aberration.
  Malcolm said, "What can I--we--do for you?"
  Gornt's smile was genuine, his teeth white,
like Malcolm's. He was of similar height but
built lighter, his clothes less elegant, dark
hair against the reddy-brown of Struan, brown
eyes against the blue. "Mr. Greyforth wanted
to confirm dates, weapons, et cetera."
  Jamie said, "You know this is all against the
law, Mr. Gornt, and the duel formally forbidden
by Sir William?"
  "Yes, Mr. McFay."
  Jamie shifted uncomfortably, detesting his
involvement more than ever, and further unsettled by the
curious mood in the room. He could not read it.
Where there should have been ice and enmity, it seemed more
a waiting moment, weirdly pleasant and
preordained. "That being said, what did Norbert
have in mind?"
  "Today's Tuesday. Would a week from today be
okay?"
  "I'd prefer Wednesday, the 10th,"
Malcolm said at once. He had
made a plan in the early hours. Sleep had
eluded him. He had fought the dragon that was in the
little bottle and had won, though the fight had taken
its toll and this morning's measure had been a
pathetic relief.
  Prancing Cloud would arrive Sunday and was
due to leave Wednesday evening. He would arrange
secretly with her captain to sail the moment he
could get aboard after the duel. Either he would have
already smuggled Angelique aboard or would
organize Jamie to escort her home in the
next ship, to be decided at the last minute, the
latest by Tuesday. It might be best to bring
Jamie with Angelique, thus negating part of his
mother's fury against Jamie by being obedient to one of
her wishes and, hopefully, make her withdraw the
termination order--he owed it to Jamie to try in every
way to extricate him. If Angelique was
aboard, perhaps he could find a way to persuade
Captain Strongbow to forget his mother's orders.
  It's a long shot, he thought, a very long shot
but a faint heart never won a fair lady and
it's the best I can do. Joss. "I'd prefer
Wednesday."
  "I imagine that will be all right, suh. As to the
place, we suggest first light at No Man's
Land twixt the village and Drunk Town, not the
racecourse as that's too public with early
morning riders and so on."
  Malcolm laughed, not knowing why. "A good
choice," he said before Jamie could answer. Much
better for me, more secluded, closer to the sea,
much easier to slip out to the clipper from the Drunk
Town wharf than ours. "It's apparent you know a
lot about Yokohama and you're here only a day."
  "It was Mr. Greyforth's suggestion, but I
did check out both early this morning. No
Man's Land is better, safer."
  "That's agreed. It will be difficult for me
to walk my ten paces. I suggest we take our
positions and on someone's order, yours if you
wish, aim and fire."
  "I will consult Mr. Greyforth."
  "What else?"
  Gornt hesitated, then glanced at Jamie.
"We can arrange details later, how our
principals arrive, by what routes, which doctor
we can trust who should be present, etc. Lastly,
th--"
  "You seem to be very well informed about
duels, Mr. Gornt," Jamie said thinly.
"You've been involved in one?"
  "Several, Mr. McFay. As a principal
once, and twice as a second, while I was at
the Richmond University." Again the smile,
warm, kind and sincere. "We take matters of
honor very seriously in the South, suh."
  The pleasant unreality of the back and forth, and
Jamie's belief that the tai-pan had been set
up by Greyforth--notwithstanding Malcolm's
stubbornness--broke his control. "Then you should know
Norbert was in the wrong," he said angrily,
"Norbert went out of his way to provoke the
tai-pan, has done several times and there's no
doubt he should apologize and then we could all
stop this stupidity."
  "Jamie!" Malcolm said sharply, and would have
told him to leave but for yesterday. Yesterday's
debt was vast and forever so he just said as to the real friend
that Jamie was, "This isn't your problem, and I
know how you feel." He looked back at
Gornt. "He is right you know, Norbert has
been personally very difficult." Gornt did not
reply. Malcolm shrugged and smiled. "Joss.
It's not your problem either, Mr. Gornt. So, you
were once a principal and twice a second.
Clearly you won. The other man?"
  "I didn't kill him, suh, wasn't trying
to kill him. I just wounded him."
  Both men watched each other, weighing the other.
  Jamie said nervously, "Then everything's
settled."
  "Yes, except weapons. Mr. Greyforth
chooses swords." Malcolm gasped and
Jamie blanched.
  "Duelling pistols were agreed," Jamie said.
"Agreed."
  "So sorry, suh, it wasn't agreed. Mr.
Greyforth as the challenged party has the right
to choose weapons."
  "But it was ag--"
  "Jamie, let me deal with this," Malcolm
said, astonished with his own detachment, expecting
trickery from Norbert. "It was always presumed
we were gentlemen and would use pistols."
  "I'm sorry but those aren't my instructions,
suh. As to gentlemen, my principal considers
himself one, and chooses to defend his honor with a
sword, which is quite customary."
  "Obviously that's not possible."
  "Mr. Greyforth also said--I must tell you I
do not approve of this and told him so--he also said
if you wanted, he would agree to knives,
swords or fighting irons." Jamie began
to get up but Malcolm stopped him.
  "In my present state, that's impossible,"
Malcolm said, then gathered himself and said firmly,
"If this is a ploy for Norbert to gain face,
to humiliate me and call off the duel, then I
spit in his eye and will continue to do so."
  Jamie flushed at the bravado, admired it
and hated it, then suddenly realized this could be a
perfect face-saver for both men. "Tai-pan,
don't you think--"
  "No. Mr. Gornt, obviously I can't,
now, even use a sword. Please ask
Norbert to accept pistols."
  "Well, suh, I will certainly ask,
certainly the first duty of a second is to try
to bring about a reconciliation and it seems to me
there's room enough for both you gentlemen in Asia.
I'll ask."
  Jamie said, "Mr. Gornt, I'll be here.
Anything I can do to help stop this insanity, just
say the word."
  Gornt nodded, began to rise but stopped as
Malcolm said, "Perhaps I could have a private
word, Mr. Gornt? You don't mind, do you,
Jamie?"
  "Not at all." Jamie shook hands with
Gornt, then said to Malcolm, "There's a
meeting of all traders to discuss Sir
William's bombshell at noon in the
Club."
  "I'll be there, Jamie, though there won't be
much discussion, just a lot of shrieking and foul
temper."
  "I agree. See you later, Tai-pan."
Jamie left.
  In the fine office once more the two men watched
each other. "You're aware of our Parliament's
stupidity?"
  "Yes, suh, I am. All governments are
stupid."
  "Would you join me in a glass of champagne?"
  "A celebration?"
  "Yes. I don't know why but I'm pleased
to meet you."
  "Ah, then you felt the same? Not right, is
it?"
  Malcolm shook his head and rang the bell.
Chen appeared and when the champagne was opened and
poured he went away, his little eyes darting from
silent man to silent man. "Health!"
  "Health." Gornt replied, savoring the
chilled wine.
  "I got the impression you wanted to speak
privately."
  Gornt laughed. "I did indeed. Dangerous
for an enemy to be able to read your mind, eh?"
  "Very, but we needn't be enemies.
Rothwell's is a good client, the hatred and
blood feud between the Struans and the Brocks
needn't touch you, whatever Tyler or Morgan
say."
  Gornt put his eyes on the cut-glass
crystal and the bubbles, asking them if he was
correct in thinking that the time was now or if he should
wait. The tawny eyes considered Struan. He
decided to dismiss the danger. "You are reputed
to like secrets, to be trustworthy."
  "Are you?"
  "In matters of honor, yes. Your
reputation ... do you like stories, legends?"
  Malcolm concentrated, the unreality of the
meeting and this man disorienting him. "Some better
than others."
  "I'm here under false pretenses."
Gornt's sudden smile lit up the room.
"Christ Jesus I don't believe I'm
truly here with the future tai-pan of the Noble
House. I've waited and planned so long for this
meeting and now it's arrived, before I came here I
had no intention of saying anything now, other than
what Mr. Greyforth asked me to say. But now?"
He raised his glass. "To revenge."
  Malcolm thought about that, unafraid and
spellbound, then drank and poured again. "It's a
good toast in Asia."
  "Anywhere. First: I need your word of honor,
the honor of the tai-pan of the Noble House, before
God, that what I tell you will remain secret
between us, until I release you."
  Malcolm hesitated. "So long as it's a
story." Then he swore the oath.
  "Thank you. A story then. Are we safe
here? Can anyone overhear us?"
  "In Asia, usually. We're aware doors
have ears as well as walls, but I can fix that.
Chen!" he called out. The door opened
at once. In Cantonese he said, "Stay
away from the door, keep everyone else away,
even Ah Tok!"
  "Yes Tai-pan." The door closed.
  "Now you're safe, Mr. Gornt. I've
known Chen all my life and he doesn't speak
English, I think. You speak Shanghainese?"
  "A little, the same with Ning poh dialect."
  "You were saying?"
  "This is the first time I have ever told this story,"
Gornt said and Malcolm believed him. "Once
upon a time," he began, no lightness now, "a
family went to England from Montgomery,
Alabama--their home for generations--father, mother, and
two children, a boy, and girl. She was fifteen,
her name Alexandra and her father was the youngest of five
brothers, Wilf Tillman was the oldest."
  "The co-founder of Cooper-Tillman?"
Struan said, jarred.
  "The same. Alexandra's father was a minor tea
and cotton broker, an investor with brother
Wilf in Cooper-Tillman, and he went
to London to work with Rothwell's on a
three-year contract to advise on cotton--
Cooper-Tillman was their major supplier.
They stayed just under a year. Unfortunately both
parents had gotten very ill, no wonder, eh, with the
fogs and that weather, I nearly died myself while
I was there--I spent two years in London
training with Brock's, one with Rothwell's.
Anyway, the Tillmans decided to go home.
Halfway across the Atlantic Alexandra
discovered she was pregnant."
  "Ayeeyah," Malcolm muttered.
  "Yes. The shock, on top of her adored
father's illness, killed him. He was
thirty-seven. They buried him at sea. The
Captain's death certificate just said
"brainstorm" but both she and her mother knew the
real cause was the bad news. Alexandra was just
sixteen, as pretty as a picture. That was in
'35, twenty-seven years ago. Alexandra had
a son, me. For an unmarried girl to have a child out
of wedlock, to be a fallen woman ... well,
Mr. Struan, no need to tell you what a
stigma and disaster that is, and Alabama's Bible
country, our part, and the Tillmans gentry.
Earlier we talked about honor, it's true what
I said, that we take honor seriously, and
dishonor. May I?" Gornt motioned
to the champagne.
  "Please." Malcolm did not know what else
to say. The voice was lilting, pleasant,
uninvolved, just a storyteller relating a
history. For the moment, he thought grimly.
  Gornt poured for Struan, then for himself. "My
mother and her mother were ostracized by society, and the
Tillman family, even her brother turned
against her. When I was three my mother met a
Virginian, a transplanted Englishman--
Robert Gornt, gentleman, tobacco and
cotton exporter, card-playing enthusiast from
Richmond--who fell in love with Mother and she with
him. They left Montgomery and were married in
Richmond. The story they fabricated was that she
was a widow, married at sixteen to a Yankee
cavalry officer who had been killed in the
Sioux Indian wars. She was nineteen then.
  "Everything was more or less all right for several
years. Until '42--the year after Dirk
Struan practically single-handedly founded Hong
Kong, the year before you were born. '42 was a bad
year for Hong Kong with its Happy Valley
fever plague, mal-aria, the Opium War with
China, the great typhoon that obliterated the city
there, and unholy bad for the Noble House because the
same typhoon killed the great Dirk
Struan." A sip of champagne. "He was
responsible for Wilf Tillman's death and for
ruining the Tillman family."
  "I know nothing about that. Are you sure?"
  Gornt smiled his smile, no animosity behind
it. "Yes. Wilf Tillman was sick with the
Happy Valley fever. Dirk Struan had
cinchona bark that could have cured him, but wouldn't
give or sell it to him, wanting him dead, like
Jeff Cooper." His voice picked up an
edge. "The Boston Yankee wanted him dead."
  "Why? And why should the tai-pan want
Tillman dead?"
  "He hated him--he had different views than
Wilf. Among other reasons, Wilf had
slaves, not illegal at that time, or now, in
Alabama. And to assist Cooper to take over the
firm. After Wilf died, Jeff Cooper bought
his shares for a pittance, and cut off my family's
remaining money. Dirk was responsible."
  Malcolm said, "We certainly have a joint
venture with Cooper-Tillman in cinchona bark,
Mr. Gornt, and are old friends. As
to the rest, I know nothing about it, or believe it.
I'll check the story the moment I get back
to Hong Kong."
  Gornt shrugged. "Years later Cooper
admitted he had never approved of Wilf
Tillman. His exact words were, "Listen,
young man, Wilf deserved everything he got, he
was a slaver and useless, never did a day's work in
his life, your Southern gentleman was vile.
Dirk was right to give the little cinchona he had
to others who he judged deserved it. It's been
my work, mine, that made the company that's paid for your
mother, stepfather and you all these years ..."
  Gornt's face twisted, then he was calm
again. Outwardly. "He said a few other things,
suh, that ... that's unimportant now. But
cutting off funds, our rightful money, was very
important. It was then the rows between stepfather and mother
began and we moved, downwards. It wasn't
till many years later I found out he had married
her for her money, his cotton and tobacco
businesses were shams, he was just a gambler and card
player, not a successful one, and she had continually
covered for him. When Mother was dying she told me
all this. But he wasn't bad to me, evil to me,
just dismissed me, I've been dismissed all my
life. Now it's time for revenge."
  "I don't see why you should blame me."
  "I don't."
  Malcolm stared at him. "I thought "fighting
irons, or swords" was the beginning."
  "That wasn't my idea, I told you. I
told Mr. Greyforth it won't work. He'll be
laughed at if he tries to insist."
  After a pause Malcolm said, "It sounds as
though you don't like him."
  "I don't like or dislike him. I'm here
to learn from him for a month and then take over when he
retires next year. That's the plan--if I
decide to join Brock's."
  "You may have to take over sooner than you
think." Malcolm's voice hardened. "Next
Thursday--hopefully."
  "You're set on having this duel?"
  "Yes."
  "May I ask the real reason?"
  "He's gone out of his way to provoke me,
surely at Brock's direction. It will be
better for Struan's if he's removed."
  "Will you try to remove me when I go
against Struan's?"
  "I will oppose you, compete with you, stop you if
I can--I wouldn't want to fight you." Malcolm
smiled a good smile. "This is a mad conversation,
Mr. Gornt. It's mad to be so truthful and so
open but we are and that's that. You said "revenge."
You're determined to have at us, because of what my
grandfather supposedly did to Wilf Tillman?"
  "Yes," Gornt said with a smile. "In due
time."
  "What about Jeff Cooper?"
  The smile vanished. "Him too. In due
time." Then, for a moment, Gornt's voice
became thick with venom. "But that's not most of the
revenge I seek. I want to destroy
Morgan Brock, to do that I need your help
..." He burst out laughing. "My God, Mr.
Struan, suh, sorry but if you could only see
yourself."
  "Morgan?" Malcolm spluttered.
  "Yes." Gornt beamed. "I can't do it
alone, I've got to have your help, that's
ironic, isn't it?"
  Malcolm groped to his feet and shook himself
like a dog and stretched and sat down again, his heart
in overdrive. He poured another glass and
spilled some on his desk and quaffed it and all the
time Gornt watched and waited, pleased with the
effect his words had had. It took Malcolm a
little time to respond. "Morgan? For God's
sake why?"
  "Because he seduced my mother when she was fifteen
and ruined her life and abandoned her. In the Bible
it says killing your father, patricide, is an
unholy deed--my mama made me swear I'd
not do it when she told me the truth of my
parentage on her deathbed. So I'm not going
to kill him, just ruin him." The words were said
flatly, without emotion. "To do that I need
Struan's."
  Malcolm took a deep breath and shook his
head again. None of this made sense to him though he
believed it all--even Dirk Struan's
behavior. Ayeeyah, so much to learn, he thought,
and listened intently as Gornt continued, saying that
Morgan was twenty at the time, apprenticed
to Rothwell's and living in their
countinghouse-residence, so it was easy for him
to sneak into her bedroom: "At fifteen what would
such a girl know, the classic Southern
belle, nurtured like a rare plant? When
Rothwell found out, he fired him, of course, but
Old Man Tyler Brock laughed and quietly
and secretly bought a controlling interest in the
firm an--"
  Malcolm was shocked. "Brock controls
Rothwell's?"
  "He did, for a time, just enough to fire Rothwell
and all their directors and appoint new ones.
When Jeff Cooper found out, he had enough clout
to force Old Man Brock to make it a hands-off
deal, fifty-fifty. In return Jeff would
run the company and keep it secret, particularly
from Struan's. The deal's still in effect."
  "Does Dmitri know?"
  "No. Nor Mr. Greyforth, I stumbled on
the details when I was in London."
  Malcolm's mind was working hard. Struan's
had been involved with Rothwell's over the years
but no one had ever said they had been poorly
treated, or cheated. Then something Gornt had said
ran to the front of his mind. "Does Morgan
know you know about him?"
  "I wrote to him in London when Mama
died. He replied it was all news to him and
denied it, but telling me if ever I was in
London to come to see him. I did. Again he
denied it. Nothing to do with him, he told me,
he'd been blamed for the mischief of some other
apprentice, nothing to do with him. I was destitute
at that time so he found me a job of sorts, then
helped me get into Rothwell's." Gornt
sighed. "Mama told me when Morgan had been
confronted by Rothwell he had said that he would
"marry the slut if her dowry be ten thousand
nicker a year."" A shudder took him though his
face did not change, nor the flatness of his
voice. "I could forgive Morgan everything,
maybe, but never that, never "the slut." That's in
writing from Rothwell, he's dead now but his letter
isn't. Thanks for listening." He got up and
stretched and started for the door.
  "Wait," Malcolm said, startled, "you can't
finish there!"
  "I don't intend to, Mr. Struan, but this
sort of talk, confession is perhaps a better word,
is good for the soul but exhausting. Also I can't
spend too much time here or Mr. Greyforth might
be suspicious. I'll arrange about the pistols,
and about shooting from twenty paces, then
come back."
  "Wait a minute for God's sake! What
help do you need? Why should I help you anyway?
What do you want from me?"
  "Not much actually--you can kill Norbert
Greyforth, but that's not essential," Gornt said
with a laugh, then again became serious. "More
important is what I can do for you. Before the end
of January, the Brocks will crush Struan's,
but that you already know, or should. I can stop them, for a
price. As God is my witness, I can give
you information that can turn their genius against themselves,
to destroy Brock's forever."
  Malcolm felt his heart turn over. If
he could get Struan's off that barb his mother would
concede whatever he wanted. He knew her too
well. She'll give me anything I want,
anything, he shouted silently, if I want her
to become Catholic she'd even do that!
  Whatever the cost, he knew he would pay it, and
pay gladly. "The price--apart from revenge?"
  "When I come back."

  Malcolm waited all day but the stranger did
not return. It did not worry him. That night
he dined alone. Angelique had said she was
tired, too many parties and late nights and an
early night would do her good. "So, my darling
Malcolm, I shall just eat a snack in my room
and do my hair and then into dream time. Tonight I
love you and leave you ... you are abandoned." He
did not mind. His brain brimmed with so much hope
that he was afraid if she had stayed he would have
to confide in her--and when Jamie dropped by early
evening he had to stop himself blurting out the
fantastic news.
  "Heavenly found an answer?" Jamie asked.
  "No, good Lord no, not yet. Why?"
  "You seem so, so ... as though the weight of the
world has fallen off you. Haven't seen you looking
so good in weeks. But you have had good news?"
  Malcolm grinned. "Perhaps I've turned a
corner and am really getting better."
  "Hope so. Your accident on top of everything
else ... I just don't know how you do it. With
all that's happened in the last few weeks, I'm
truly tired, and that fellow Gornt's the last
straw. Something about him frightens me."
  "How so?"
  "Don't know, just a feeling.
Maybe he's not as harmless as he seems."
Jamie hesitated. "Do you have a minute
to chat?"
  "Of course, sit down. Brandy? Help
yourself."
  "Thanks." Jamie poured a small measure
from the sideboard then pulled the other, high-backed
armchair beside the fire opposite him. The
curtains were drawn against the night, the suite
cozy. Nice smell of wood smoke and the sound
of ship's bells from the fleet in the bay also
comforting. "A couple of things: One way or
another I want to go back to Hong Kong for a
couple of days--before Christmas."
  "To see Mother?"
  Jamie nodded and sipped his brandy. "I'd like
to be on Prancing Cloud. She'll dock
... why the smile?"
  "You're one jump ahead of me. I was
planning to be aboard her too."
  Jamie blinked, then smiled seraphically.
"You've changed your mind and you're going to do what
she says?"
  "Not exactly." Malcolm told him his
plan about Prancing Cloud and saw Jamie's
euphoria evaporate. "Don't worry,
I'm a much better shot than Norbert, and
providing he agrees to shoot from twenty paces
without the walk he's as dead as the dodo--if I
decide to kill him. Forget Norbert.
Angelique: if we can't smuggle her aboard,
I say "we" because you always were part of the plan, you
bring her by the next ship, so one way or another
you'll be in HK before Christmas."
  Jamie hesitated. "Mrs. Struan will still be
very irritated to find Angelique with us."
  "Let me worry about that."
  "I do. Which brings me to the nut: when I leave
Struan's I was thinking of trying to start my own
firm, that's really what I wanted to chat about.
If you'd have any objections."
  "On the contrary, I'd go out of my way,
Struan's would, to help in every way. But that won't
be for years yet."
  "I think she's decided I am to go."
  "I'll object like hell," Malcolm said,
startled. "You're due for promotion, a raise
and the company wouldn't want to lose you, she would know
that. That's a shocking idea."
  "Yes. But if it becomes necessary
... bear with me, Tai-pan, if it's necessary would
you object?"
  "To you going off on your own? No. But I
hate the idea and Struan's would be the loser, I
swear to God. It won't happen, and if, if you
asked to leave I'd find a way to make you stay
--to persuade you to stay. I would."
  "Thanks, thanks very much." Jamie took a
large swallow and felt a little better. Not from the
warmth of the brandy but from the way Malcolm had
spoken. The last few weeks had been bad.
Yesterday, because of Mrs. Struan's letter to him,
he had been confronted with an immortal truth:
however loyal you are to a company, however much
service you give "the company," the company can and
will spit you out at its whim, without conscience. And
what is "the company"? Just a group of men and
women. P. Mrs. Struan for instance.
  People are "the company" and those in charge can and
always will hide behind that facade, that "the company must
survive," or "for the good of the company," and so
on, wrecking or promoting for personal
reasons, enmities, or hatreds.
  And don't forget most companies these days are
family companies. In the end it's "family"
that wins. Blood is thicker than competence. They
may fight amongst themselves but in the end they usually
unite in the face of the enemy who is anyone not
family, so it's Alfred MacStruan who has
been positioned to take over Japan. Nothing I
can do, will do about that. Maybe family businesses
are more humane, can be better than impersonal
bureaucratic, anonymous institutions but even
there, perhaps more so, you're subject to the "Old
Boy" network. You lose either way ...
  Last night, untypically, he had got very
drunk in his little house in the Yoshiwara, finding
no solace in Nemi. Every time he thought about the
truth of "the company"--adding it to the hanging
crime he had almost committed, and Tess
Struan's unfairness, Malcolm's
stubbornness, and his own stupidity, knowing that if
Malcolm had not stopped him he would have ripped the
string off and torn the letters up and thrown them
overboard--his head would spin and only another
tumbler of rum would stop the motion until it
created spinning of its own. Nemi couldn't help:
"Jami, wot you matter? Jami, Jami!"
  "It's Machiavelli who said it best," he
had said, his words slurred and incoherent,
"put not your trust in bloody princes, they can
plead expedience. Bloody princes,
tai-pans, mothers of bloody tai-pans, sons
of Dirk Struan and their sons ..." and then he
had wept.
  Ay, he thought queasily, that's the first time in
years, last time was when I'd just arrived in Hong
Kong, twenty years ago and heard Ma had died
while I was on the high seas. She must have known
she was dying when I left. "Off you go, my
bonny laddie, earn our fortune, and write every
week ..." If it wasn't for her we would have
all died--only her strength kept us alive
until the Struan arrived and our joss changed.
  Cried my heart out. Like last night, though the
tears were different. I was crying for my lost
innocence. Can't believe how naive I was
to believe in "the company." Would Dirk have let
me down? Never. The tai-pan wouldn't have,
couldn't have, but he's just a legend. I've got
to find the courage to strike out on my own--I'm
thirty-nine, old in Asia, though I don't
feel old, only a ship without a rudder. And so
is Malcolm ... Is he?
  He looked at him, still noticing the change.
Malcolm's different, more like his old self, he
thought. More adult, is that possible? Don't know,
but either way his joss is fixed, like mine. "I'm
glad we didn't tamper ... I can't say how
sorry I am she's blocked you."
  "Me too." Malcolm had told Jamie
what Sir William had said about expecting the
letter, and about opium and their Bengal fields, the
news of which this morning had erupted the Settlement
into a frenzy. The noon meeting at the Club had
been more violent than usual with the added motion,
carried unanimously, that Sir William should be
strung up or at the least impeached if he tried
to enforce Parliament's stupidity. He saw how
deeply unhappy Jamie was and once again was
tempted to pour out the marvelous development
called Gornt. But he remembered his oath.
"I'm very confident now, Jamie. Don't
worry. You're off to the Yoshiwara?"
  "Not immediately though I've got to see Nemi."
Jamie smiled ruefully. "I hung one on
last night, going to take her a present. It's
not necessary but she's a good sort, and lots of
laughs. First I'm seeing Nakama, Phillip
asked me to see him for half an hour.
Seems he asked Phillip about business and
banking, capital, things like that--Phillip asked
me to explain the rudiments."
  "That's curious."
  "Yes. The bugger's got an enquiring mind
all right. Pity he's not so forthcoming with us."
  "Barter your knowledge for something we want to know. Tomorrow
I think I'll have a chat with Phillip. Ask
him to see me, will you?" Malcolm's voice
hardened. "We were to share all information, wasn't that
our agreement?"
  "Yes, yes it was." Jamie finished the
brandy. "Thanks. And thanks for the chat." He
stood up and said sincerely, "I hope with all
my heart it works out for you, Malcolm."
  "Yes, I know, Jamie. It will work for you,
too. 'night."
  In the quiet of his room, Malcolm
contentedly stretched out his legs towards the fire,
anxious for the morrow and more from Gornt. What could
be the price? he mused, watching the coals. He
could hear voices inside the building and outside
on the praia. Occasional laughter and a few
drunken songs. John Marlowe had come by this afternoon
bringing a message from the Admiral, could he
drop by the flagship tomorrow, or if not convenient,
Sir William's.
  "I could meet at Sir William's.
What time?"'
  "Noon?"'
  "Good. What's it about?"'
  "Don't know," Marlowe said. "I'll
bet it's not to pass the time of day." Ever since
Admiral Ketterer had returned from the
engagement at Mirs Bay and Hong Kong he
had been seething about adverse and critical
reports in the papers, and was still furious that
British-made cannon had fired on his ships.
"I don't think he took kindly to some of the more
rude remarks at the meeting today."
  "Tough," Malcolm had said and laughed, still
intoxicated with Gornt's information.
  Marlowe had laughed too. "For God's
sake don't say that on his quarterdeck, the
whole ship would blow up! By the way, my trials
are approved, Monday or Tuesday, weather
permitting. Which would be best for you both?"'
  "How long would we be out?"'
  "Leave at dawn, or thereabouts, back
latest by sunset."
  "Tuesday."
  A coal fell out of the fire onto the hearth but
safely. He nudged it under the basket with the
poker and stirred the embers. The blue-greened
orange flames rose a little and died down again,
making picture for him. Positive pictures.
About him and about her. He looked at their adjoining
door. No sound ever came through it.
  Gornt's the key to Tess.
  Ironic that he needs me as I need him and
we are enemies. I've a feeling we always will
be. What's his price? It will be something I can
deliver. He's wise enough to do that. Why are you so
sure? Revenge is too strong a motive, I
know.

  In the Inn of the Lily, Phillip Tyrer was
being massaged by a muscular Japanese woman
with massive arms, her fingers of steel finding the
pressure points, and she played them like a
keyboard to his groans of pleasure. This house
was not as delicate, or as expensive, as the
Three Carp but the massage was the best he had
ever had and took his mind off Fujiko and
Nakama and Andr`e Poncin, and Sir
William who had been furious all morning,
culminating at noon when the raging venom from the
Club almost blew the roofs off Yokohama.
  "As if it's my fault Parliament's gone
mad," Sir William had shouted at the lunch
table, the Admiral equally furious. "Is it,
Phillip?"'
  "Of course not, Sir William," he had
said, co-opted to the lunch against his wishes, the
General the third guest.
  "Parliament's always been arbitrary and
stupid! Why the devil don't they let the
Foreign Office run the colonies and have done with
all the heartache. As for the shower called traders
here, enough to make you spit blood."
  The Admiral had growled, "Fifty lashes
with a cat-o'-nine-tails would make them tow the
line, by God! Every man jack of them, especially
journalists. Rotters, all of them."
  The General had said smugly, still smarting from the
dressing-down Sir William had given him
over the riot, "What can you do, my dear Sir
William, except take it like a man? And
Admiral, old chap, you were really asking for it
by making public political
statements. First rule for Flag Rank or
general's stars I always thought was to keep the old
head down, be circumspect with public orations
and suffer in silence."
  Admiral Ketterer's neck went purple.
Sir William managed to interrupt the next
broadside with: "Phillip, I'm sure you have
an abundance of work to do, for God's sake get
the correspondence copied and the complaint to the
Bakufu must go off today!"
  He had escaped thankfully. Nakama had
greeted him affably, "Ah, Taira-sama,
I hope you better feeling. Mama-san
Raiko ask me ask how hea'rth is, as you not
keep appointment with Fujiko who is tears ...
who was in tears and--"'
  "My health is fine. Last night I, I
had a very pleasant time in the Inn of the Lily,"
he had said, astounded Andr`e's predictions had
been so accurate. "Fujiko? I'm having
second thoughts about her contract, yes, by God,
second thoughts!" He had been delighted to see
Nakama blink and was even more pleased that he could
use his fright over Sir William's spleen
during the morning and at lunch to act out Andr`e's
plan.
  "But Taira-sama, I th--"'
  "And we're not speaking English anymore today
and no more questions about business. You can talk to Noble
House McFay-sama and that's the end of that.
..."
  He groaned aloud as the masseuse probed
deeply. Her fingers stopped at once.
"Iy`e, dozo ..." No, please don't
stop, he said in Japanese and the woman laughed,
and replied, "Don't worry, Lord, by the time
I have dealt with this pallid, out-of-strength
fishlike body of yours, you'll be ready for three
of the best Lilies in the House."
  He thanked her dully, not understanding but not caring.
After three hours with Nakama in Japanese, and
fielding more of the man's remarks about Raiko and
her Inn--just as Andr`e had forecast--his head was
spinning.
  In time the woman began the soothing touches with
knowing hands, fragrant with oil and she finished,
wrapped him in a warm towel and left. He
drifted off but woke as the shoji slid open and a
girl came in and knelt beside him. She smiled and
he smiled back and told her he was
tired and please would she just sit there until he
woke up, again following Andr`e's instructions.
The girl nodded and smiled and was quite content. She
would get her fee anyway.
  Andr`e's a genius, he thought, equally
contented, and went happily into sleep.

  Tonight was the second time that Andr`e went to visit
Hinodeh. It was exactly ten days and
twenty-two hours and seven minutes ago that he
had beheld her in all her glory, the night
imprinted on him forever.
  "Good evening, Furansu-san," she had said
shyly, her Japanese melodious. Their
anteroom was off their small veranda and their house
set in the gardens of the Three Carp, fragrant
as she was fragrant. Her kimono's golds and
browns of winter moved gracefully as she bowed and
motioned to the cushion opposite. Behind her the
shoji to their bedroom was ajar, just enough to see the edges
of the futons and coverings that would be their first bed.
"The sak`e is as I was told you would like it.
Cool. Do you always drink sak`e cool?"'
  "Yes, yes I, I like taste more good."
He found himself stuttering, his Japanese
harsh-sounding, his hands seemed to be in the way, and his
palms were sweating.
  She smiled. "Strange to drink cold
drinks in winter. Is your heart cold in winter
and summer?"'
  "Eeee, Hinodeh," he said, the pulse
pounding in his ears and throat. "I think my heart
like stone for so long now, think about you, not know if
hot or cold or what. You beautiful."
  "It is only for your pleasure."
  "Raiko-san told you about me, yes?"'
  Her eyes were slanting and calm in the white of
her face, brows plucked with half-moons
painted in their place, high forehead, widow's
peak, raven hair piled high and pinned with
tortoiseshell combs that he longed to loosen.
"What Raiko-san has told me I have
forgotten. What you told me before the signing is
accepted and forgotten. Tonight we begin. We meet
for the first time. You must tell me about you, everything you
want me to know," her eyes picked up a light
and crinkled with amusement, "there will be time enough,
yes?"'
  "Yes, please, forever I hope."
  After all the contract terms had been
agreed over days and had been set down and read and
reread and put in simple terms that he could
understand, he was ready to sign in front of her and
Raiko. He had summoned all his courage:
"Hinodeh, please excuse, but must say, must
tell truth. The bad."
  "Please, there is no need, Raiko-san
has told me."
  "Yes, but, but please excuse me ..."
The words came haltingly, even though he had
rehearsed them a dozen times, new waves of
nausea washing through him. "Must tell one time:
I caught bad disease from my mistress, Hana.
No cure possible, so sorry. None. You will,
must catch is, if, must catch if become
consort, so sorry." The unseen sky had
seemed to fly apart for him as he waited.
  "Yes, I understand and accept that and I have had
written in my contract that I absolve you of
any blame, concerning us, any blame, you
understand?"'
  "Ah, blame, yes, understand blame. Thank
you an--"'
  He had had to excuse himself and rushed out and was
violently sick, sicker than he had even been
in his life, sicker than when he discovered that he
had caught it, or after he found Hana dead.
When he came back he did not apologize,
nor would an apology be expected. The women
understood.
  "Before I sign, Furansu-san," she had
said, "as you had importances, it is important
to me to ask if you promise to give me the knife
or poison as agreed in the contract?"'
  "Yes."
  "Thank you. Both important things need not
be mentioned, or talked about again. You agree,
please?"'
  "Yes," he had said, blessing her.
  "Then it is done. There, I have signed,
please to sign, Furansu-san, and
Raiko-san is our witness. Raiko-san
says our house will be ready in three days. On
the fourth day from now I will be honored to receive you."
  On the fourth day, sitting in front of her in
their private sanctuary, he was consumed with her
beauty, the oil lamps bright but not overly so.
"This house please you, Hinodeh?"' he asked,
trying to sound interested but only obsessed to have her
unadorned.
  "It is more important if it please you,
Furansu-san."
  He knew she was only doing what she had been
trained to do and her responses and actions would be
automatic, trying her best to put him at his
ease, whatever she felt within. With most
Japanese men he could usually tell what they were
thinking, with Japanese women almost never--but then
it's usually the same with most French women, he
thought. Women are so much more secretive than we
are, so much more practical.
  Hinodeh looks so peaceful sitting there
motionlessly, he thought. Is she volcanic or
sad or terrified--or filled with so much fear and
loathing that she's numb.
  Blessed Mother forgive me but I don't care, not
at the moment, later, perhaps later I will, not now.
  Why would she agree? Why?
  But that must not be asked, never. Hard to obey that
clause, and yet it's an added spice, or the
one issue that will destroy me, us. I don't
care, hurry up!
  "Would you like to eat?"' she asked.
  "At moment, I, I not hungry." Andr`e
could not take his eyes off her, nor hide his
desire. The sweat trickled.
  Her little smile did not change. A sigh.
Then, with every movement leisured, long fingers
untied her obi and she stood and let the outer
kimono fall, all the time watching him,
tranquil as a statue. Then the under-kimono,
then the first slip and the second, and then the
loincloth. She turned without haste showing herself
to him, and then again and stood before him. Perfect in every
way.
  Hardly breathing, he watched her kneel,
pick up her cup and sip, then sip again, the
pulse in his head and neck and loins pushing him to the
limit of control.
  He had planned over the days to be gallant
with words and gestures and movements, so Gallic
and Japanese and worldly and practiced, to be the
best lover she had ever had, would ever have without
regrets, to make their first joining a memorable and
wonderful experience. It was memorable but not
wonderful. His will snapped. He reached out for her
and hurried her to the futons and there he was
subhuman.
  Since that night he had not seen her, or
Raiko, avoiding them and the Yoshiwara.
The next day he had sent a message
to Hinodeh, saying that he would inform her when he
next intended to visit her. In the interim he had
had delivered another payment of gold to Raiko,
his salary pledged for two years to pay the contract
price--and then much more.
  Yesterday he had said he would visit her tonight.
  He hesitated on their veranda threshold.
Shoji screens shut out the night. An inner
golden light beckoned him. His pulse was pounding
as before, throat choked. Inner voices overflowed
with vile language directed at himself, shouting
at him to leave, to kill himself--anything to avoid
her eyes and the disgusting mirror image of himself that
had been therein. Leave her in peace!
  All of him wanted to run and all of him
wanted to possess her again, in any way, every
way, worse than before, whatever the cost, hating
himself, better to die and end it but first her. I must.
  He forced his feet out of his shoes and slid the
door aside. She was kneeling exactly as before,
same costume, same smile, same beauty,
same delicate hand motioning him to sit near her,
same gentle voice: "The sak`e is as I was
told you would like it. Cool. Do you always drink
sak`e cool?"
  He gaped at her. The eyes that had been
filled with so much hate when he had stumbled away
from her, now were smiling at him with the shy sweetness as
in the first moment. "What?"
  Again, as though she had never said it, she repeated
in the same tone, "The sak`e is as I was told
you would like it. Cool. Do you always drink sak`e
cool?"
  "I, I, yes, yes I do," he said hardly
hearing himself over the roar in his ears.
  She smiled. "Strange to drink cold drinks
in winter. Is your heart cold in winter and
summer?"
  Parrot-like he muttered the correct
responses, no difficulty in remembering every
word and happening, indelibly recorded, and though his
voice was erratic, she did not seem to hear it,
just continued as before, her eyes slanting and calm.
  Nothing changed. "Would you like to eat?" she
asked.
  "At moment, I, I am not hungry."
  Her smile did not change. Nor the sigh.
She got up. But now she turned down the oil
lamps and went into the bedroom that he had
defiled and doused those lights completely.
  When his eyes had adjusted to the dark, he saw
that the tiniest glimmer came through the shoji panels
from the veranda lamp, barely enough to see her shape.
She was disrobing. In moments the sound of the coverlet
being pulled back.
  When he could stand he groped to his feet and
went into the room and knelt beside the bed, long since
realizing she had been trying to save face, his,
to blot out that which could never be blotted out.
  "From my mind, never," he muttered in misery,
wet with tears, "I don't know about you,
Hinodeh, but it never will. I'm so sorry, so
sorry. Mon Dieu, I wish, oh how I
wish ..."
  "Nan desu ka, Furansu-sama?"
  It took him a little time to adjust to use
Japanese words, and he said, breaking,
"Hinodeh, I say ... just thank Hinodeh.
Please excuse me, I so sorry ..."
  "But there is nothing to be sorry for. Tonight we
begin. This is our beginning."



                 

    Wednesday, 3rd December:
  Hiraga caught a passing reflection in the
butcher's shop window and did not recognize
himself. Passersby on the High Street barely
noticed him. He retraced his steps, stared at
his shadowed image--and new disguise. Top hat,
high collar and cravat, a broad-shouldered,
waisted frock coat of dark broadcloth,
waistcoat of blue silk, stainless steel chain
across it joining the toggle to a fob watch, tight
trousers and leather boots. All the gift of
H.m. Government, except the watch given him
by Tyrer--for services rendered. He took off his
hat and looked at himself, this way and that. Now his
hair covered his pate and was growing fast, nowhere
near as long as Phillip Tyrer's but certainly
long enough to be considered European. Clean-shaven.
The quality and cheapness of British razors had
impressed him greatly, another stunning example
of manufacturing prowess.
  He smiled at himself, pleased with his
masquerade, then took out his watch, admiring it,
noting the time, 11:16. As if
sixteen minutes mattered, he thought
scornfully, though pleased he had learned
gai-jin timekeeping so quickly. I have learned much.
Not enough yet but a beginning.
  "Want 'ter buy a nice leg of frozen
Aussie mutton, off the mail ship's ice
hold, me Lord, or wot'tabout some nice fat
bacon, Hong Kong smoked?" The butcher was
big-bellied, bald, with arms like cannons and a
bloodstained apron.
  "Oh!" Then Hiraga noticed the meats and
offal and game hanging on the other side of the
windows with their swarms of flies. "No, no
thanks. I just 'rooking. Good day, sir," he
said, hiding his revulsion. With a flourish he
replaced his hat at a jaunty Tyrer tilt and
continued down High Street towards Drunk
Town and the village, politely raising his hat
to other pedestrians or riders who replied in
kind. This pleased him even more for it signified
acceptance, by their standards, so different from
Japanese customs--from civilized standards.
  Fools. Just because I use their dress and begin
to wear like them they think I am changed. They are still
enemy, even Taira. Stupid of Taira
to change his mind over Fujiko, what is the
matter with him? That does not fit into my plan at
all.
  Hiraga caught sight of Struan hobbling out
of his building with Jamie McFay, Ori's
woman between them in animated conversation. This
reminded him of his meeting with the Noble House
Number Two man. His head was still reeling from
Western facts and figures, and still limp from all
the information McFay had extracted from him about
moneylenders and rice merchants like the
Gyokoyama. "Jami-san, perhap
possib'er you meet one these men, if secret,"
he had told him in desperation to escape, "I
interpret if keep secret."
  The shoya was waiting for him. Sensing the man's
eagerness to learn what he had learned, Hiraga
toyed with him, accepted the offer of a massage.
Then, relaxed in a proper yukata, and over a
delicate lunch of rice, dried squid,
morning fresh sea bass sliced paper thin with
soya, daikon--horseradish--and sak`e, he
said he had had talks with important gai-jin and
they had answered his questions. He sipped his sak`e
and volunteered none of it.
Important information needed encouragement.
Reciprocity. "What news from Ky@oto?"
  "It is all strange," the shoya said, glad
that the opening had been given him. "My Masters
informed me the Sh@ogun and the Princess Yazu
arrived safely and are inside the Palace.
Three more ambushes by Ogama patrols of shishi
... no so sorry, no details yet of how many
killed. Lord Ogama and Lord Yoshi hardly
move from behind their walls ... But Sh@ogunate
samurai now guard the Gates, as in the past."
  Hiraga's eyes widened. "They do?"
  "Yes, Otami-sama." The shoya was
delighted that the bait was taken. "Strangely, a
little distance from all Gates, there are secret
pickets of Ogama samurai, and, from time to time
the opposing captains confer secretly."
  Hiraga grunted. "Curious."
  The shoya nodded and, like the good fisherman he
was, struck hard. "And oh yes, not that it may
be of importance to you but my overlords believe the
two shishi I mentioned before, Katsumata, and the
Choshu shishi, Takeda, escaped capture in
Ky@oto and are travelling on the Tokaid@o."
  "To Yedo?"
  "My Masters did not say. Clearly the
news would be of no value." The shoya sipped
some sak`e, hiding his amusement at Hiraga's
attempt to cover his consuming interest.
  "Anything to do with shishi could be of
significance."
  "Ah, in that case ... although it's unwise
to relate rumors," the shoya said, pretending
embarrassment, judging the time ripe to land this fish,
"they report there is a story around the Inns of
Ky@oto that a third person escaped the first
ambush. A woman, a samurai woman
skilled in the art of shuriken ... what is it
Otami-sama?"
  "Nothing, nothing." Hiraga struggled for
composure, a thousand questions ricocheting in his mind.
Only one woman samurai in Katsumata's
school had ever gained that skill. "You were saying,
shoya? A woman of samurai lineage
escaped?"
  "It's only a rumor, Otami-sama.
Foolishness. Sak`e?"
  "Thank you. This woman, was there anything
else?"
  "No. Such a silly rumor is
hardly worth reporting."
  "Perhaps you could find out if, if such nonsense
has any truth to it. I would like to know. Please."
  "In that case ..." the shoya said, noting the
big concession of "please," his voice honeyed
with a trace of humility. "Any service to you and
your family, valued clients, the Gyokoyama
is honored to do."
  "Thank you." Hiraga finished his sak`e.
Sumomo had been in Ky@oto with
Katsumata ... Where is she now, why
didn't she go on to Shimonoseki as I
ordered, what was she doing, if she escaped where
is she?
  In repayment, and with an effort, he put those and
other questions aside for later, and concentrated. He
took out a sheaf of notes and began explaining,
partially parroting, what "Taira" and
"Mukfey" had told him over the hours. The
shoya listened intently, thankful that his wife was
secretly overhearing them and writing it all down.
  When Hiraga had rambled about loans,
financing, and banking--unclear on most of what
he had been told--the shoya, impressed with
Hiraga's memory and grasp of what was so
totally alien to him, said seriously, "Remarkable,
Otami-sama."
  "Another important matter." Hiraga
took a deep breath. "Mukfey said gai-jin have
a kind of market, shoya, a stoku markit where
the only goods bargained for, bought or sold, are
small printed papers called stoku or sheru
that somehow represent money, huge amounts of
money, each stoku being part of a kompeni."
  He drank some tea. Seeing the shoya's
lack of comprehension, he took another deep
breath. "Say daimyo Ogama gave all
Choshu, all land and produce of the land to a
kompeni, the Choshu Kompeni, and decreed that
the kompeni was to be split, by deed, into ten thousand
equal parts, ten thousand sheru, understand?"
  "I ... I think so, please go on."
  "Thus the stoku of the Choshu Kompeni is
ten thousand sheru. Next, the daimyo, on
behalf of the kompeni, offers all or any part
or number of sheru to anyone with money. For their
money the man or woman get this piece of paper
saying how many sharu of the Choshu Kompeni he
has bought. This person then owns that part of the
kompeni and therefore the same proportion
of its wealth. The money he and others pay into the
kompeni then becomes its kaipit'r, I think
this Mukfey gai-jin said, the money needed to run
and improve the wealth of the kompeni to pay
stipends, or reclaim land or buy arms, or
seeds, or improve fishing boats, to pay
whatever is necessary to increase and make Choshu
prosper, to make the value of the Choshu
Kompeni higher.
  "Mukfey explained that ... He said in any
market, Shoya, prices change, in famine
times often daily, no? It's the same in this
daily stoku markit with hundreds of different
kompeni, buyers and sellers. If the Choshu
harvest is huge, the value of each part of the
Choshu Kompeni will be high, if famine, low.
The value of each sheru varies also. Understand?"
  "I think so," the shoya said slowly, understanding very
well indeed, covertly afire with delight and
questions.
  "Good." Hiraga was tired but intrigued by these
new ideas though at times lost in their maze. He
had never, ever, bargained in a market, or an
Inn, just paid what was asked, when asked, never in his
life argued about the cost of anything or the amount
of a bill--except since he became ronin.
Bills were always sent to whoever received his stipend,
if you were samurai. If unmarried, normally
to your mother. Buying and handling money was the job of
women, never of men.
  You ate what she--mother, aunt, grandmother, sister
or wife--bought from your stipend, you clothed or
armed yourself in the same way. With no stipend you
starved, you and your family, or you became ronin,
or voluntarily had to give up your samurai
status and become a farmer, laborer, or far
worse, a merchant. "Shoya," he said,
frowning. "Prices vary in a food or fish
market. But who decides the price?"
  The guild of fishermen or farmers, the shoya
could have said, or more likely the merchants who really
own the produce having lent them the money to buy
nets or seeds. But he was much too cautious,
most of his energy spent trying to remain calm in the
face of so much priceless information, however
incomplete. "If there are lots of fish, they
are cheaper than when there are few. It depends on
the catch, or the harvest."
  Hiraga nodded. Obviously the shoya was being
devious, hiding the truth or twisting
it. But that is only normal for merchants and
moneylenders, he thought, suddenly deciding to keep
any meeting between Mukfey and this man in reserve,
and also to keep for later the last piece of
kompeni lore that, for some reason he could not
fathom, intrigued him more than the rest: that if you
were the one who formed the kompeni, you decided how
many stoku you reserved for yourself, without payment, and
if the number amounted to fifty-one or more out of every
hundred, you retained power over the kompeni. But
why ...
  His head almost burst with sudden understanding: With
no outlay you became the kompeni sh@ogun, the
bigger the kompeni the bigger the sh@ogun ... with no
outlay!
  When sonno-joi is fact, he thought
weakly, we--the samurai council--we will
recommend to the Emperor that only our council
may form kompeni, then, at long last, we
control all the parasites, the merchants and
moneylenders!
  "Otami-sama," the shoya was saying, not having
noticed any change in Hiraga, his own mind
agog with the marvelous information he had gleaned,
"My overlords will be most grateful and so am I.
When we have managed to sift all your brilliant
thoughts and ideas, perhaps I could have an opportunity
to ask a few insignificant questions?"
  "Certainly," Hiraga said, exultant with the
rosy future. The more questions the better--they will
force me to understand first. "Perhaps when you hear more about
Ogama and Yoshi, or the shishi, or that woman.
Shuriken you said?"
  "I will do my best," the shoya answered, knowing
a deal had been struck. Then his mind took him
back to a missing, essential piece of the
puzzle. "Please, may I ask, what is this
kompeni. What is it, what does it look
like?"
  "I don't know," Hiraga said, equally
perplexed.

  "Good of you to be punctual, Mr. Struan,"
Admiral Ketterer said gruffly, "not normal
for, er, traders." He was going to say
"tradesmen" but decided there was plenty of time
to bring him to deliver the broadside. "Take a
seat. Sherry?"
  "Some dry sack, thank you, Admiral."
  The orderly poured a glass,
replenished the Admiral's port and left. They
lifted their glasses, no love lost between either of
them. The desk was clear of papers, except for
an official document, an opened envelope and a
letter in his mother's writing. "What can I do for you?"
Malcolm asked.
  "You know that some of my sailors were killed
by Chinese pirates, firing shore-based
British cannon during our Mirs Bay
engagement. British cannon."
  "I've read the news reports, but I
don't know for certain if they were British
manufacture."
  "I do. Made sure myself." Sourly the
Admiral picked up the document. "The
Governor's initial investigation suggests the
probable culprits were either Struan's or
Brock's."
  Malcolm looked back at the older,
florid-faced man, unafraid. "He can
suggest what he likes, Admiral Ketterer,
but any formal accusation had better be backed
by proof or we would be very upset, and the Brocks
apoplectic. I know of no such deal and in any
event sale of armaments are not forbidden
by Parliament. Does Norbert Greyforth?"
Jamie had warned him that Greyforth had also been
summoned by the Admiral at 10:30, but had not
appeared until 11:00 A.m. and that meeting
had lasted barely three minutes.
  Ketterer's neck reddened, remembering
Greyforth's inflammatory response. "No.
That, that impertinent fellow declined to discuss the
matter. Do you?"
  "I don't know what you want to discuss,
Admiral."
  "The matter of the importation and selling of
cannon and armaments to the natives here. And
warships. And opium."
  Malcolm said carefully, "Struan's are
China traders and we trade according to British
law. None of those articles are forbidden by law."
  "Opium soon will be," the Admiral
snapped.
  "When it is, then that trade ceases."
  "It's against Chinese law now, and native
law here!"
  "Struan's are not, I repeat not trading in
opium here, even though it is not, I repeat not,
against British law."
  "But you do admit the trade's pernicious and
immoral."
  "Yes, but at the moment approved by Her
Majesty's Government and unfortunately the
only commodity we can barter for China's tea, from
which Parliament derives huge taxes."
  "I'm well aware of the China problem. I would
like you and your company to anticipate the law now
by agreeing voluntarily never to import opium
into Japan."
  "We're not trading in it here."
  "Good. If I find any ships carrying
opium I intend to confiscate the cargo and the
ship."
  "I'd say you do so at your legal peril,
Admiral. Has Sir William agreed or
approved your intention?"
  "Not yet. I would like you and the other trades--
other traders to do so willingly. The same with
breech-loading rifles, cartridges, cannon
and warships."
  "Did Greyforth agree to such an astonishing
proposal?"
  The neck went crimson. "No."
  Malcolm thought a moment. He and Jamie had
reasoned in advance that this was what the Admiral had
in mind. Apart from his mother's letter. "We have a
meeting with Sir William in a few days," he
said. "I'd be honored if you'd attend as my
personal guest. All traders would hear you out."
  "My views are already well known. You
traders of all people should know which side of your bread
is buttered, that without the fleet to protect you and
your trade routes, you're helpless. If you
supply natives with cannon you threaten the
Royal Navy, you'll be helping to sink your own
ships, murder your own countrymen and yourselves
to boot!"
  "If you take the example of India or any
of the oth--"
  "My whole point, Mr. Struan!" the
Admiral slammed at him. "Without natives
having our armaments the Mutiny would never have
happened, revolts everywhere would be more quickly
contained, savages all over the world could be more
easily and properly educated, useful trade
would be conducted in peace and world order would flourish
in the benevolence of the Pax Britannica. And
miserable, fornicating pirates would not have the means
to fire on my flagship by God! And
without the Royal Navy ruling the seas, by God,
there's no Pax Britannica, no British
Empire, no trade and we'll be back in the
Dark Ages!"
  "Confidentially you're quite right, Admiral,"
Malcolm said with abject pretended fervor,
following Uncle Chen's advice: "When a
mandarin is furious with you, for whatever reason,
quickly agree "confidentially" he is right, you can
always assassinate him later when he's
asleep."
  Over the years he had been involved in the
same argument with Army, Navy and government
officials. And witnessed his father and mother quarreling,
his father for free trade and his mother for morality, his
father raging about the insolvable opium triangle, his
mother vehemently against opium even so--and sales of
arms--truth on both sides, both inflexible, the
quarrel always ending with his father drinking himself into a
stupor and his mother smiling with that fixed, infuriating
smile that nothing would dislodge, his father's final
barb always: "my Old Man--and your Prince
Charming--the Great Green-eyed Devil Dirk
himself started the trade and we've flourished on it
so help us God!"
  Many the time he had wondered--but never dared
to ask--if she had really been in love with the father and
not the son, had settled for the son because the father would
not. He knew he would never ask and if he did
she would just smile that fixed smile of hers and
say, "Malcolm, don't be absurd."
  "Confidentially, you're right, Admiral," he
repeated.
  Ketterer choked on his port and poured some more.
"Well, that's something by God!" He looked up.
"Then you'll make sure Struan's does not
engage in arms sales here?"
  "I will certainly take everything you said under
advisement and consult with my fellow traders."
  Ketterer took out a handkerchief and blew his
nose, took a pinch of snuff, sneezed and
blew his nose again. When his head had cleared his
baleful eyes looked at the young man,
irritated that he could perceive no weakening. "Then
let me put it another way. Confidentially, you
agree to help Jappos to acquire cannon,
British cannon, any bloody cannon or
British warships is stupid?"
  "For them to have a comparable navy would be wr--"
  "A disaster, sirrah! Total
disaster and stupid!"
  "I agree."
  "Good. I would like you to persuade all other
traders to your opinion: no arms here,
particularly cannon, of course no opium.
Confidentially of course."
  "I'd be glad to put forward those opinions,
Admiral."
  Ketterer snorted. Malcolm began to get
up, not wanting to be cornered. "A moment, Mr.
Struan, another matter, before you go. A
private matter." The Admiral motioned at the
envelope and letter on his desk. "Th. From Mrs.
Struan. You know what it's about?"
  "Yes, yes I do."
  Ketterer moved the letter to the center of his desk.
"Your Noble House is supposed to be first in
Asia, though I'm told Brock's are pulling
ahead of you now. Never mind which, you could be a
conduit for good. I would like you and your company
to assist me in this just cause. Just, Mr.
Struan."
  Exasperated Malcolm said nothing, considering
he had answered at length and was not prepared for
another lecture.
  Pointedly Ketterer said, "Confidentially,
between you and me, I don't normally acknowledge such
letters from civilians, normally. It goes without
saying: Royal Naval rules and regulations
belong to the Royal Navy." A sip of port
and a subdued liverish belch. "Young Marlowe has
invited you and ... and your fianc@ee aboard
Pearl during his trials. Tuesday. For the
day." The eyes bored deeper. "Has he not?"
  "Yessir," Struan muttered, his mind in
spasm as his ears seemed to have betrayed him.
  "Of course my permission is needed." The
Admiral let this float in the air, then said,
"By the way, Mr. Struan, this intended duel is
ill-advised, yes indeed." Malcolm blinked
at the non sequitur, and tried to concentrate as
the Admiral continued, "As much as that, that
Greyforth fellow deserves to pass on as soon
as possible, duelling is against the law and
ill-advised, and mistakes can happen, bad
ones. Clear?"
  "Yessir thank you for the advice but you were
say--"
  "Thank you, Mr. Struan," the Admiral
said smoothly, getting up. "Thank you
for coming to see me. Good day."
  In turmoil Malcolm groped to his feet,
not sure if he understood correctly. "Do I
understand you to mean that I ca--"
  "I mean nothing more than what I have said,
sir." The voice was withering, clear and from the
quarter-deck. "Just as you have told me, in
confidence, you will take what I have said under
advisement, in return, I tell you, in
confidence, that I will take what you say, and do under
advisement--before Monday, midnight. Good day."

       END OF VOLUME VII













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



  Volume VIII of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 1579-1806




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

            BOOK THREE

                 

    Wednesday, 3rd December: (continued)
  Outside on the promenade the air smelt good
and clean and uncomplicated, and Malcolm took
deep breaths until its strength began to take the
pounding out of his head and chest. Exhausted and
elated, he slumped on to the first bench and stared at
the fleet without seeing it.
  Have I understood Ketterer correctly,
Malcolm asked himself, over and over, once again
blinded with hope, that Ketterer might, just might be
prepared to forget Mother's letter and give Marlowe
permission to have us aboard and not forbid Marlowe
to marry us?
  ""In confidence," Ketterer had harped on
that," he muttered, "and "between ourselves" and "in
return."" Does that mean he'll keep
quiet if I do my part? What in God's name
could I do and say before Monday night to persuade
the bugger because that's what he is, a blackmailing
sod with no morals!
  Nonsense! It's a deal--he's offered a
deal, a quid pro quo--a marvelous deal for
me, and not bad for him. I'd have to be careful, the
other traders won't take kindly to any
voluntary embargo. I'll have to be aboveboard
because that bugger's smart and won't be satisfied just
with promises.
  Who can I trust with this new twist in the
tangle of my life? Heavenly? Jamie?
Marlowe? Of course not him. Angel? No. Not
her. If Uncle Chen was here he'd be the one but
as he's not, who? No one. You'd better tell
no one!
  You have to carry this alone--isn't that what Mother
said Dirk always told Father about being tai-pan.
"It's the being alone and carrying responsibility
alone, that's the joy and the hurt of it." What can
I do about cannon and gu--
  "Afternoon, Mr. Struan."
  "Oh! Oh hello, Mr. Gornt."
  "You looked so sad I just had to interrupt you."
  "No, not sad," Malcolm said tiredly, "just
thinking."
  "Ah, sorry, in that case I'll leave you,
suh."
  "No, please sit down. You said, for a
price?"
  Edward Gornt nodded. "I apologize for not
seeing you before, suh, but Mr. Greyforth wouldn't
see the ... the light. Now he agrees
to pistols, double-barrelled duelling pistols, and
one shot or two as you choose from twenty
paces."
  "Good. And?"
  "And I tried to talk him out of the duel but he
said, "Not unless Malcolm Struan publicly
apologizes," words to that effect."
  "Good. But the other matter, we've no walls
or doors here." Malcolm motioned along the
almost deserted promenade. "The price?"
  "I thought this a perfect place but we can't
spend too much time and have to be careful, Mr.
Greyforth could have binoculars on us."
  "Is he watching?"
  "I don't know for sure, suh, but I'd bet
on it."
  "Then somewhere else? Later?"
  "No, here's fine, but he's very wily and I
don't want him to get suspicious. The
price: If my information assists you to block
Morgan's plan to sink you and bankrupts
Brocks."
  "You know the details?"
  Gornt laughed softly, "Oh yes and much more,
not that Morgan or Old Man Brock know I
know, or Mr. Greyforth." He dropped his
voice even more, his lips hardly moving. "This
all has to be kept secret between us but the price
is you break Morgan Brock, pursue him
into bankruptcy, or prison if you can--if it's
necessary to break Tyler it's all the same to me, but
out of the wreckage you guarantee that I get their
fifty percent interest in Rothwell's free and
clear; that you assist me with the Victoria Bank
to raise what's necessary to buy out Jeff Cooper's
half; that for ten years you don't come after me other
than a normal competitor, giving me favored
nation status on any business dealings--all in a
letter contract, written and signed by you. After ten
years the gloves are off."
  "Agreed," Malcolm said at once,
expecting harsher conditions. "But the Victoria
bastards aren't our friends, Brock started that bank
and have excluded us always, so we won't be much
help there."
  "They soon will be, suh. Soon the whole
Board will fart if you say fart. This all must be
kept very secret, of course. What do you plan
after the duel?"
  Malcolm did not hesitate, finding it so
strange that he could trust this man so immediately,
telling him about going aboard Prancing Cloud.
"This presumes I'm the winner and not hurt
badly. Once I'm in Hong Kong I can
simmer things down," he said confidentially.
  "What about your shooting? I mean having to use
sticks?"
  "One is fine to balance with, for that amount of
time." Malcolm smiled thinly. "I've been
practicing."
  "Now, I propose a deception to avoid
legal repercussions that worked well in Virginia
and should do the same here, in case either of you is
killed: you both write the other a letter, dated and
delivered the night before the duel, saying that you have
mutually agreed to call the duel off "at the
No-Man's-Land rendezvous tomorrow, and you will both
accept, as gentlemen, a mutual,
simultaneous apology from the other."" Gornt
smiled. "We, the seconds will testify that
tragically, while you were showing each other your
pistols, one went off."
  "A fine idea. Has Norbert agreed?"
  "Yes. I'll deliver his letter to you,
Tuesday, send him his by Mr. McFay, but best
keep it secret, that it's a device."
  "Tuesday" kept echoing in Malcolm's
head but he forced it aside. Gornt was saying,
matter-of-fact, "After the duel--it would be best
if you kill him, not wound him--I'll come out to the
clipper with you. In exchange for the written
contract, I'll lay out the details how you can
utterly wreck Brock's financial safety
net, with a package of authenticated copies of
letters and documents, enough for any court of law, and
others that hand you a cudgel to use with the
Victoria."
  Malcolm felt the glow deep within him. "Why
not now, why wait till Wednesday?"
  "Mr. Greyforth might kill you," Gornt
said calmly, "then the knowledge would be wasted and I would have
put myself at risk for no reason."
  After a pause Malcolm said, "Say he
does, or wounds me badly, how do you get the
revenge you seek?"
  "I'll approach Mrs. Struan, suh, at
once. I'm gambling that won't be necessary. I
gamble on you, not her."
  "I heard you did not gamble, Mr. Gornt."
  "At cards for money, no suh, never--I
saw the futility of that with my stepfather. With life?
To the limit." Gornt felt eyes on him and
said softly, "Someone's watching," and he glanced
around. It was Angelique, coming out of the
Struan's, across the street. She waved.
Malcolm waved back and got up. The two men
watched her approach.
  "Hello, Angel," Malcolm said warmly,
the Admiral's words dancing in his head. "May
I introduce Mr. Edward Gornt of
Rothwell's in Shanghai? My fianc@ee,
Mademoiselle Richaud."
  "Ma'am!" Gornt took her hand and kissed
it gallantly.
  "Mr. Gornt," she murmured, reading his
eyes. There was an abrupt, curious silence between
the three of them, then for no apparent reason they
burst out laughing.
  "What is it?" she asked, her heart picking
up beat.
  "Joie de vivre," Gornt said.
  She looked up at him, liking what she saw,
warmed by the smile, then took Malcolm's arm,
already relating the encounter in the letter she had
interrupted:

I confess, dearest Colette, I spied them
on the promenade so put on my best bonnet and
took them by surprise, and my Malcolm's arm
(Defensively) for this new arrival is tall
and handsome with the naughtiest glint behind his eyes that I
saw instantly, though Malcolm could not
possibly be aware of, or he would have been more
jealous than usual, poor dear! I wanted
to meet this tall stranger casually. He has the
slightest of Southern accents, broad shoulders,
narrow waist, a fencer probably, and glorious
dancer--I do hope he'll be a friend, I need
them here so much ...

  "La, ch@eri," she said, fanning herself against
the immediate and pleasing internal heat, a
subconscious feline reaction to Gornt's
masculinity. "Excuse me, I didn't mean
to interrupt an important conference
..."
  "You didn't, Angel," Malcolm said.
  "I was just leaving," Gornt said. No need
to conceal all of his admiration. "I'm pleased
to make your acquaintance, Ma'am." He bowed.
"Good day, suh, I shall be in touch."
  They watched him walk off. "Who is this Mr.
Gornt?"
  He told her, but nothing in fact about the real
Mr. Gornt. He was fogged by the thought of
Tuesday.

  "More pork in black bean sauce, Younger
Sister?" Ah Tok asked, chomping on a
piece of fish.
  "Thank you." Ah Soh reached over with her
chopsticks to replenish her bowl, then snapped up
the choice, quick fried prawn she had ogled.
"Please continue, Elder Sister."
  The two women were in Ah Tok's room, their
lunch spread out in a multitude of dishes, a
fresh pot of jasmine tea close at hand.
"Ayeeyah, it's very difficult. Illustrious
Chen gave no clear instructions."
  "That's not like him." Ah Soh took more of the
succulent pieces of beef in oyster sauce.
"Not like him, not at all."
  "I agree, but then his new concubine, the whore
from Soo Chow, is sure to be taking most of his
concentration."
  "Ayeeyah! Is it true she's fourteen with
no pubics?"
  Ah Tok took up another bony piece of
fish head and sucked it appreciatively.
"It's only the Garlic People of Chosen who
don't have pubics." She spat the bones onto
the floor and selected another part.
  "Interesting. I wonder if it's all the
garlic they eat? May I re-read his letter,
Elder Sister?"
  It said:

Greetings, Ah Tok, Sixth Cousin
Twice Removed, You did very well to consult
me at once. The cork of the bottle revealed
clear traces of Dark of the Moon which must be the
Expeller of Dog Land in the Eastern Sea.
An abortion! The whore was wise and unwise
to use it, the Master wise and unwise
to advocate it. Until we know if
he made the decision, or she did without his knowledge, you
must do nothing. Cousin, listen to him sleeping--
he's always muttered in his sleep since a
child--perhaps he will tell you more. Instruct Ah Soh
to do likewise and both of you be like bats.
Unfailingly obey.

  "Ayeeyah, what does he mean, be like
bats?" Ah Soh asked irritably. "Bats
are silent but they squeak. Bats can fly in the
dark but are blind during the light, are invisible at
night, helpless by day. Their droppings are
valuable but stink to Heaven. What does he mean,
heya?"
  "Eyes and ears and nostrils open, like a bat,
and watch where you drop droppings!" Ah Tok
cackled. "Ten thousand summers to Noble House
Chen, without him we would not have known her Jade
Gate's hung on my son's door!"
  "How do we know it was him?" Ah Soh said with a
robust belch. "How do we know it was the Master and
not someone else?" She dropped her voice and
looked around as though expecting alien ears and Ah
Tok's chopsticks hesitated in midair.
"Someone like Long Pointed Nose, the same kind
of foreign devil as she is, heya? Those two
are as close as lice in a beggar's crotch. And
didn't he sink the bottle, all the evidence in
the sea, remember?"
  The old Ah Tok was no longer laughing.
"Fang-pi!" she said, using the rare
expletive. "That's what Illustrious Chen must
have been cautioning us about! Bats weave as they fly
and don't alight on the first branch and even then
they hang upside down. He's telling us to find
out which Yang possessed that Yin! Ayeeyah,
yes, I agree, it's possible, possible Long
Pointed Nose's made my son wear a green
hat!"
  "The Master cuckolded!" Ah Soh's eyes
went to Heaven. "It's true Long Pointed
Nose spent enough time in her room to ..." She
gasped. "Ayeeyah! Remember, weeks ago,
when she sent me away and later screamed because she
thought someone was climbing into her room from outside
when it was only the wind banging the shutters? I
remember now, I was quicker than a bat to her
side but Long Pointed Nose was already there and
both of them ... now I think of it, both were whiter
than a five-day corpse! Was that the
time his Yang ..."
  "When was it, Young Sister? The day? When?"
  "It was the day ... the day after the Master had that
native whore from the brothel across the Canal."
  Both women began calculating, minds
abacus-fast. Today was twelfth month, fifth
day. "That would be, that would be tenth month,
eighteenth or nineteenth day, Elder Sister."
  "Not enough, perhaps not quite enough time, unless this Dark
of the Moon is swallowed earlier." Absently
Ah Tok sucked more of the fish head, then spat out
the bones with conviction: "They must have lain together
earlier. The whore had plenty of chances, heya?
She was always at that barbarian house, even before you
both stayed there."
  "You're right, you're right as usual, Elder
Sister! We must inform Illustrious Chen at
once."
  "But why should she give her Jade Gate to such
an ugly foreign devil when my son's panting
over it?"
  Ah Soh shrugged expansively.
"Barbarians! Who knows what they think? You should
tell the Master!"
  Weak with excitement, Ah Tok looked at
her bar. Madeira, whisky, brandy. "We need
strength!" She selected the whisky and poured two
large tots. "To work! We must plan, plot and
think how to get the whore and her paramour to reveal
the truth!"
  "Good, very good! Together we'll do it!"
  "But no hint to my son, unwise for us to carry
dirty tidings. Until we are sure." They
clinked glasses. "By all gods great and
small, no one is going to cuckold my son,
make him wear the green hat and live a long and
happy life!"

  "Good evening, Father Leo," Angelique said
politely, knelt and kissed his hand, finding it
hard to contain her revulsion against his strong odor.
They were alone in the little church, the nave dimly
lit, only a few candles burning, the dying sun
coming through the small, poorly executed
stained-glass window. There were few Catholics in
the Settlement, the revenue miserly, even so the
altar and crucifix were rich. Outside, in the
sunset, Vargas waited to escort her back
again.
  "You wanted to see me?" she asked
innocently, knowing she had missed Mass again on
Sunday. Her pink bonnet had been chosen
carefully, also the long Kashmir shawl over her
most maidenly afternoon dress of somber silk.
"How well you look, Father."
  "I'm glad to see you, senhorita, my child,"
he said with his heavy Portuguese accent. "You
are not at Mass again."
  "It's the vapors, Father. I'm still recovering
from the disorder ... Dr. Babcott advised
rest," she replied, her mind on what she would
wear for tonight's birthday banquet for the Russian
Minister, and what she could do to entertain Malcolm
during the evening. "I am sure by next week I
will be better."
  I'm glad, my young and not so feeble teller of
lies, Leo thought, disgusted with the perfidy of
humanity. It's ungodly to dance at night and
kick up your heels and show your unclothed nether
parts. "Never mind, I will confess you now."
  Angelique could have yawned, he was so
predictable. Meekly she followed him into the
confessional, knelt and went through the motions, glad
for the screen between them, parroting her litany, comforted
with the pact she had made with the Virgin Mary,
repeating their code fervently, as always, "... and
Father, I forgot to ask the Blessed Mother for
forgiveness in my prayers."
  Her absolution was quick, a modest penance of a
few Hail Marys and she felt the better for it.
She began to get up--
  "Now, a private matter, my child. Two
days ago Mr. Struan sent for me,
privately, and asked me to marry you both."
  She gasped, then smiled gloriously. "Oh
Father, how marvelous!"
  "Yes, my child, yes it is, "Please marry
us as soon as possible," the young Senhor
Struan said but it is difficult indeed." Night
and day he had wrestled with the problem. An urgent
letter had gone the same day to the Bishop of
Macao, Catholic spiritual leader in Asia,
begging for advice, equally urgently. "Very
difficult for us."
  "Why, Father?"
  "Because he is not a Catholic an--"
  "But he has agreed our children are to be brought
up in the True Church, he promised."
  "Yes, yes, my child, he has, he has, he
told me the same but he is not of
marrying age, not without permission, nor are you, but
I wanted to tell you secretly that, even so, I
have asked His Eminence for permission to conduct the
ceremony for the greater Glory of God, even
so--with or without your father's ... approval. I
hear your father, he is missing, somewhere in French
Indo-China or Siam, or somewhere."
Particulars of her father's frauds and flight had
raced around the Settlement but, in deference to her
had been kept quiet, also from Struan. "If
His Eminence agrees, I am sure Senhor
Seratard, in loco parentis, he will agree,
even so."
  The tightness in her throat did not go away.
"How long will it take for His Eminence to reply,
to approve?"
  "By Christmas, around Christmas, before then, if
he is in Macao and not travelling, visiting the
Faithful in China, and if it is the will of God."
As usual he sat facing away from the screen,
ear close to it for whispered privacy, but now he
glanced through the mesh and could see her vaguely.
"The matter I like to discuss, privately, is the
conversion of the Senhor."
  Again she gasped, "He said he would convert?"
  "No, no he has not yet seen the Light,
that's what I want to talk about." Father Leo
leaned closer to the screen, savoring her nearness,
choked with a desire he knew to be unholy and
Satan-sent, the same that, on his knees,
daily and nightly he fought against--as, in equal
torment, he had fought against for as long as he had
been within the Church.
  God give me strength, God forgive me,
he thought, almost in tears, wanting to reach out and
fondle the breasts and rest of her that was hidden by the
screen and by her shawl and by her clothes and the wrath of
God. "You must help, help him embrace the
True Faith."
  Angelique was as far from the screen as she could
be. Painstakingly, she eased the curtains open
to reduce the claustrophobia the boxlike
structure gave her. Confessionals never used
to be like this, she thought, shuddering. It's only since
... since that which never happened. "I will help,
Father, I do, as much as I can," she said, her
nervousness increasing, and again began to leave.
  "Wait!"
  The violence in the voice shocked her. "Father?"
  "Please ... wait, please
wait, my child," the voice said nicely now, but the
niceness was forced and this frightened her for it was no
longer the voice of a priest and sacrosanct in a
sanctified place, but of a stranger. "We must
talk about this marriage, and his conversion, my child, and
beware of evil influences, yes, we must, conversion
is a must, a must as preparation for ... for
Eternity."
  ""Must," Father?" she muttered. "Were you
about to say, "must as preparation for
marriage"?"
  "For ... for Eternity," the voice said.
  She stared at the shadow behind the screen sure that
he was lying, appalled that she could even consider it,
let alone believe it. "I will help all I
can," she said and got up and groped through the
curtains for air.
  But he stood in her path. She noticed sweat
on his forehead and that he towered over her, in height
and bulk. "It's for his own, his own salvation.
His, my child. It would be better, better before."
  "Are you saying, Father, his conversion is a must before
you will marry us?" she asked, in dread.
  "It is not to me the conditions, what His Eminence
decides govern us, we are faithful
servants!"
  "In my fianc@ee's church, he has not said
I must become Protestant, of course I cannot
force him either."
  "He must be made to see the Truth! This is a
God-sent gift, this marriage. Protestant?
That heresy? Apostasy? Unthinkable, you'd be
lost forever, doomed, excommunicated, your
eternal soul consigned to everlasting torment in the
Fire, to burn, to burn forever!"
  She kept her eyes down and was barely
coherent. "For me yes, for him ... millions
believe otherwise."
  "They're all mad, lost, doomed, and forever
they'll burn!" The voice hardened even more.
"They will! We must convert the heathen. The
Malcolm Struan must con--"
  "I'll try, good-bye, Father, thank ...
I'll try," she mumbled and stepped around him and
hurried away. At the door she turned back
a moment and genuflected and went out into the light,
him standing in the aisle, his back to the altar, all
the time his voice ringing in the rafters, "Be an
instrument of God, convert the heathen, if you love
God save this man, save him from
purgatory, if you love God save him,
help me save him from Hellfire, save him
for the Glory of God, you must ... before you marry,
save him let us save him save him ..."

  That evening a samurai patrol came out of the
guard house at the North Gate. Ten
warriors, fully armed with swords and light
battle armor, an officer at their head. He
led the way over the bridge and passed the barrier
into the Settlement. One man carried a tall
narrow banner with characters on it. The leading samurai
held flares aloft that cast weird shadows.
  The High Street and the seafront walk were still
busy in the pleasant evening. Traders,
soldiers, sailors, shopkeepers taking a
constitutional or standing in groups, chatting and
laughing, here and there, with a few singsongs and drunks
and one or two wary male prostitutes. Down
on the beach some sailors had lit a fire and were
dancing a tipsy hornpipe around it, a
transvestite amongst them, and from the distance came
the noisy undercurrent of Drunk Town.
  The ominous presence was noticed. People stopped in
their tracks. Conversation hesitated in
midsentence. Then ceased. All eyes turned
northwards. Those nearest the patrol backed out
of the way. Not a few felt for a revolver and
cursed that it was not in the pocket or holster.
Others retreated and an off-duty soldier near
an alley took to his heels to summon the
Marine night watch.
  "What's the matter, suh?" Gornt asked.
  "Nothing, yet," Norbert said, his face
grim. They were amongst a group on the promenade
but still well away from the samurai who paid no
attention whatsoever to the silent crowd watching them,
slouching along out of step as was their custom.
  Lunkchurch sidled up to them. "You armed,
Norbert?"
  "No. Are you?"
  "No."
  "I am, suh," Gornt took out his tiny
pistol, "but it won't make much of a dent in them
if they're hostile."
  "When in doubt, young feller," Lunkchurch said
hoarsely, "take a powder I always say." He
stuck out his hand to Gornt before he hurried off.
"Barnaby Lunkchurch, Mr. Gornt, pleased
to meet you, welcome to Yokopoko,
see you in the Club, hear you play bridge,
any time."
  Everyone was quietly easing out of range.
Drunks had suddenly become sober. All were very
much on guard, the speed of a sudden samurai rush
with flailing swords too well known. Norbert
had already chosen a line of retreat should it prove
necessary. Then he saw the Marine night watch come out
of the side street on the double, rifles ready, a
sergeant at their head, to take up a commanding, though
not provocative position and he relaxed.
"Nothing to worry about now. Do you always carry that,
Edward?"
  "Oh yes, suh, always. I thought I'd told
you."
  "No, you didn't," he said, curtly. "Can
I see it?"
  "Certainly. It's loaded, of course."
  The pistol was tiny but deadly.
Double-barrelled. Two bronze cartridges.
Silver sheathed hilt. He gave it back, hard
eyed. "Neat. It's American?"
  "French. My pa gave it to me when I went
to England. Said he'd won it from a riverboat
gambler, the only thing he gave me in his life."
Gornt laughed softly, both of them watching the
approaching samurai. "I even sleep with it,
suh, but I've only fired it once. That was at
a lady who was sneaking off with my wallet in the
dead of night."
  "You hit her?"
  "No suh, wasn't trying to, just parted her
hair, to frighten her. A lady shouldn't steal, should
she, suh?"
  Norbert grunted and put his eyes back on
samurai, seeing Gornt in a new light, a
dangerous one.
  The patrol walked down the center of the road,
sentries in front of the British, French and
Russian legations--the only ones with permanent
guards--quietly cocked their rifles, already
warned. "Safety catches on! No firing,
lads, till I says," the Sergeant growled.
"Grimes, go warn his Nibs, he's with the
Russkies, third house down the street,
quietly now."
  The soldier slid away. Street lamps of the
promenade flickered. Everyone waited
anxiously. The strutting officer approached
impassively. "Mean-looking
bastard, ain' he, Sar'nt?" a sentry
whispered, his hands slick on his rifle.
  "They're all mean-looking bastards. Easy
now."
  The officer came abreast of the British
Legation and barked command. His men stopped and formed
up facing the gate as he stomped forward and spoke
guttural Japanese at the Sergeant. A
sharp silence. More impatient, imperious words,
clearly orders.
  "Wot you want, cookie?" the Sergeant
asked thinly, half a metre taller.
  Again the ugly sentences, more angrily.
  "Anyone knows wot he's saying?" the
Sergeant called out. No answer, then
Johann, the interpreter, carefully came out of the
fringe of the crowd, bowed to the officer who bowed back
perfunctorily and spoke to him in Dutch. The
officer replied in Dutch, searching for the words.
  Johann said, "He's got a message, a
letter, for Sir William, has to deliver it
personally."
  "Don't know about that, Mister, not with them
bloody swords at his side."
  The officer started towards the Legation gate and
all safety catches came off. He stopped.
A furious tirade at the Sergeant and
sentries. All samurai eased their swords a
quarter length out of their scabbards and took a
defensive stance. Down the road the Marine
patrol moved into riot order. Everyone waited
for the first mistake.
  At that moment Pallidar and two other
dragoon officers hurried out from the Russian
Legation just down the street, in evening dress
uniform, dress swords. "I'll take charge
Sergeant," Pallidar said. "What's the
problem?"
  Johann told him. Pallidar, well
rehearsed in Japanese customs now, went over
to the officer, bowed, made sure the officer bowed
equally. "Tell him I'll accept the letter.
I'm aide-de-camp to Sir William," he
said exaggerating.
  "He says, Sorry, his orders are to do it
personally."
  "Tell him I'm authorized t--"
  Sir William's voice stopped him.
"Captain Pallidar--just a moment! Johann,
who's this letter from?" He stood on the
threshold of the Russian bungalow, Zergeyev
and others crowding the entrance beside him.
  The officer pointed at the banner and snapped more
words and Johann called out, "He says it's from
the tair@o but I guess he means the roju,
the Elders. He's been ordered to deliver it at
once, personally."
  "All right, I'll take it, tell him to come
over here."
  Johann translated. Imperiously the
officer beckoned Sir William to come to him but
Sir William called out, even more sharply, with
even less courtesy, "Tell him I'm at
dinner. If he doesn't step up right now, he
can deliver it tomorrow."
  Johann was too practiced to translate
exactly and only gave just enough emphasis
to transfer the meaning. The samurai officer
sucked in his breath with fury, then stomped over to the
Russian gate, brushed past the two huge
bearded sentries and stood before Sir William,
clearly waiting for him to bow.
  "Keirei!" Sir William barked.
Salute!--one of few words he allowed himself
to know. "Keirei!"
  The officer flushed but automatically bowed.
He bowed as to an equal, seethed even more when he
saw Sir William just nod as to an inferior,
but then, he thought, this foul little man is the leader
gai-jin with a reputation for anger as vile as his
smell. When we attack I will personally kill
him.
  He took out the scroll, went forward and handed
it over, stepped back, bowed perfectly, waited
until his bow was returned, however rudely,
completely satisfied that he had bested the enemy.
To rid himself of his anger, he cursed his men and
strode off as though they did not exist. They
followed, seething at the gai-jin rudeness.
  "Where the devil's Tyrer?" Sir William
asked.
  Pallidar said, "I'll send someone to find
him."
  "No, ask Johann to join me, will you
please?"
  "No need for that, Sir William,"
Erlicher, the Swiss Minister said, "if it's in
Dutch I can read it for you."
  "Thank you, but it best be Johann as he knows
some Japanese too," Sir
William said, not wanting to share anything in
advance with any foreigner, particularly one who
openly represented a small but growing, highly
specialized armament industry anxious for
exports, with a reputation based on the
extraordinary and unique quality of their
watchmakers, one of the few areas where British
manufacturers could not compete.
  The dining room, largest room in the bungalow,
contained a table for twenty ladened with fine silver
and serving plates. All Ministers were guests,
except von Heimrich who was still sick,
Struan, Angelique at the head of table, some
French and British officers, with two liveried
servants behind each seat and more to serve. "Can I
use the anteroom, Count Zergeyev?" Sir
William said in Russian.
  "Of course." Count Zergeyev opened the
door. They waited a moment until Johann
hurried in and he closed it.
  "Evening, Sir William," Johann said,
pleased that he had been called. He would be the first
to know what this was all about, and could continue to be
useful, profitably, to his own country's
Minister. He broke the seal of the scroll and
sat down also. "Dutch and Japanese. It's
short." Rapidly he scanned it, frowned,
re-read it and then again and laughed nervously.
"It's addressed to you, the British Minister and
says: "I communicate with you by dispatch.
By order of Sh@ogun Nobusada received from
Ky@oto, all ports are to be closed at
once and all foreigners expelled and driven out,
not nee--"'"
  "Driven out? Driven out did you say?"
The bellow went through the door. An uneasy
pall fell on the dinner guests.
  Johann winced. "Yes sir, sorry sir,
that's what it says: "and driven out, not needing or
wanting any dealings between foreigners and our people. I
send you this before commanding an immediate meeting to finalize
particulars of your urgent withdrawal from
Yokohama. Respectful communication.""
  "Respectful? God-cursed bloody
impertinence by God ..."
  The tirade continued. When Sir William
paused for breath, Johann said, "It's signed
"Nori Anjo--Tair@o." As I understand
it, Sir William, that's almost like Dictator,
he's gone up in the world."

                 

               KY@OTO

    Thursday, 4th December:
  Toranaga Yoshi was livid. "When was the
tair@o appointment confirmed?"
  "The day before yesterday, Sire, by carrier
pigeon to Lord Anjo at Yedo," Wakura, the
Lord Chamberlain, head of the palace officials,
said smoothly, untouched by his guest's open
anger, and hiding his joy--he had been looking
forward to this meeting that he had arranged in his
quarters within the palace. "The formal scroll,
signed by the Sh@ogun at the request of the Son of
Heaven, was sent, I believe, for urgent
delivery to Lord Anjo Nori the same day."
  This made Yoshi even angrier. His
ancestor, Sh@ogun Toranaga, had made
carrier pigeons the exclusive property of the
Sh@ogunate. Over two and a half centuries
this method of communication had gone into decline as
unnecessary, and now was only used to announce such
vital occurrences as the death of a Sh@ogun or
an Emperor. The Bakufu chose not to notice
that for years certain Osaka zaibatsu
moneylenders were surreptitiously using pigeons
--leaving them open to punitive measures, extra
taxes, or favors, if the Bakufu cared
to enforce the law.
  "And the fatuous ultimatum to the gai-jin? When
is that to be delivered?" Yoshi asked.
  "At once, Sire. The Imperial request
was included in the same carrier pigeon
message, Sire, confirmed by Sh@ogun
Nobusada, and marked, Deliver at once."
  "The order is baka, the haste even more
baka!" Yoshi pulled his padded overmantle
closer around his shoulders. The light rain that
patted the gardens outside added a dampness to the
chill. "Send another pigeon cancelling the
order."
  "If it was up to me, Sire, I would do so at
once, since you suggest it. As soon as you
leave, Sire, I will seek permission but I
imagine your wishes will be too late, the gai-jin
leader will have already received the command, it may even have
been given to him yesterday."
  Wakura happily kept his face
and manner penitent. This was a culmination of years
of intriguing in support of the Emperor's
wishes, the opinion of most daimyos, most
court nobles, of Ogama who presently held
power in Ky@oto, though the Gates were ostensibly
once again guarded by the loathed Sh@ogunate--but
only with the permission of Ogama--also of the
Princess Yazu and, most important of all,
in support of his own views.
  His deft and sagacious timing a few days
ago had delighted him. He had waylaid the
Princess during her morning walk in the palace
gardens and in one move had neutralized the
Sh@ogunate, Bakufu, and Yoshi, most
dangerous of his enemies. "Imperial
Princess, I hear some courtiers close to the
Divine, with your interests in mind, whisper that the
Lord, your husband, should appoint Lord Nori
Anjo tair@o, as soon as possible."
  "Anjo?"' she had said in disbelief.
  "People of wisdom believe, Princess, it should
be done quietly and quickly. Plots in Yedo
abound and this would avoid interference by ...
ambitious enemies," he had said
delicately, "enemies who constantly try
to undermine your revered husband, who must also have
cursed shishi connections. Remember, Otsu!"
  "As if I will ever forget! But Anjo--not that
I have any influence to arrange such a matter--is
a dullard and a fool. As tair@o he will
become even more arrogant."
  "True, but raising him above the other Elders
might be a small price to pay to make your Lord
Sh@ogun more secure during his minority, and gag
his ... his only rival, Lord Yoshi."
  "Could a tair@o remove his position of
Guardian?"'
  "Probably, Princess. Another point in
Anjo's favor, the wise whisper, is that he
is the perfect instrument to use against gai-jin:
simple-headed but obedient to Imperial
requests. The Divine would notice such
loyalty and no doubt reward such service. If
it was done quietly and quickly, I've heard the
wise say, the better it would be."
  So easy to implant the seed that had blossomed
like one of my hothouse orchids overfertilized--
how wise I was to maneuver her marriage. Her
words in that dull-witted youth's ears, some
dependent nobles co-opted, my own
advice quickly sought and quickly given, and it was
done.
  And now for you, Toranaga Yoshi, he thought
happily, Yoshi the handsome, the cunning, the
strong, the highborn usurper waiting and snuffling
in the wings of power, ready to start the civil war that
I and all but a few radical nobles dread, the
war that will crush the resurgence of Imperial power
and once more put the Imperial court under the foot
of whatever current brigand warlord bestrides the
Gates, who thus can strangle our stipends and
makes us beggars again.
  He suppressed a shudder. Not so many generations
ago, the then Emperor had to sell his signature
on the Ky@oto streets to raise money for
food. Not so many generations ago court marriages
were arranged to ambitious, upstart daimyos,
hardly samurai class, their only
qualification for higher rank being success in war,
and money. Not so many years ago ...
  No, he thought, none of that is going to happen.
Once sonno-joi is a fact, our loyal
shishi friends will disband and return to their fiefs, all
daimyos will bow down to Him, we at Court will
rule and our golden age will come again.
  He coughed and settled the immense sleeves of
his elaborate court dress more to his liking,
watching Yoshi, his eyes narrowed in his heavy
face that was made up according to court custom.
"Surely the order to expel the gai-jin is good,
Sire. The Emperor's wise and long-known
aversion to gai-jin and the Treaties will come to pass,
and our Land of the Gods rid of them forever. This should
please you too, Lord Yoshi."
  "If the order was meaningful, yes. If it would
be obeyed, yes. If we had the means to enforce
it, yes. But none of that will happen. Why was I not
consulted?"
  "You, Sire?" Wakura's painted eyebrows
soared.
  "I'm Guardian of the Heir by Imperial
appointment! The boy is under age and not
responsible for his signature."
  "Oh so sorry, Sire ... had it been
left to me of course your approval would have been
sought first. Please, do not blame me, Sire,
I can decide nothing, only make suggestions,
I am just a servant of the Court, of the
Emperor."
  "I should have been consulted!"
  "I agree, so sorry, these are strange
times."
  Yoshi's face was taut. The damage was
done. He would have to extract the Sh@ogunate from
their own dung. Fools! How?
  First Anjo--one way or another ... My
wife was correct.
  Ah, Hosaki, I miss your counsel.
Thinking of his family, his eyes drifted outside
and at once his fury seemed to dissolve. Beyond the
shoji window he saw his guards waiting in the lee
of the exquisite roof, the gardens behind them, the rain
indulgent, sparkling the carefully orchestrated
reds and golds and browns making it all such a
pleasing picture to eye and soul--so different from
Yedo, he thought beguiled. Hosaki would enjoy it
here, a huge change from our Spartan life. She
appreciates beauty, she would like it here.
  So easy to be swallowed up, by the weather and
gardens, kind skies and tender rain, best
music, poetry, exotic foods, abundant
silks and clothes makers, exquisite carp and
singing birds, the alabaster-skinned beauties of the
Court, and of Ky@oto's Floating World, the
Shimibara, the most sought-after in all Nippon,
without a care in the world except to seek the next
pleasure.
  Since coming to Ky@oto, apart from his temporary
peace with Ogama, he had achieved little except
pleasure times--so rare for him. Pleasure with
Koiko, daily sword practice and the martial
arts, marvelous massage--Ky@oto famous for
it--banquets at every meal, playing Go and
chess, writing poetry.
  How wise of my ancestor to confine the
Emperor and these overdressed sycophants
to Ky@oto, and to build his own capital at
Yedo, far from their seductions and twisted
manipulations--and how wise to forbid a Sh@ogun
coming into this honeyed trap.
  I should leave. How can I without Nobusada?
  The Court had all but excluded him. So had
Nobusada. Twice the youth had cancelled a
meeting at the last moment because of a chill. The
doctor had officially confirmed the chill but his
eyes agreed it was an excuse. "But the Lord
Sh@ogun's health does worry me, Lord
Yoshi. His constitution is not strong and his
manliness leaves much to be desired."
  "Is it the fault of the
Princess?"'
  "No, no Sire. She is vigorous and her
yin ample and succulent enough to satisfy the most
particular yang."
  Yoshi had questioned the doctor carefully.
Nobusada had never been a swordsman or
hunter or outdoor person like his father and brothers,
preferring the easier sports of falconry and
archery, or, more often poetry competitions and
calligraphy. But there was nothing wrong with that.
"His father is still as tough as an old saddle and
his family known for longevity. You have no cause
for alarm, Doctor. Give him one of your
potions, get him to eat more fish, less polished
rice, and less of the exotics the Princess
enjoys."
  She had been present at the only interview
he had had with his ward a few days ago. It had
gone badly. Nobusada had refused to consider
returning to Yedo, refused even to discuss a
possible date, refused his advice in every other
matter, taunting him with Ogama: "The Choshu
control the streets, Ogama's men are stamping out
the vile shishi, Cousin. I'm not even safe
surrounded by our warriors, I am only safe
here under the Emperor's protection!"
  "That is a myth. You are only safe in
Yedo Castle."
  "So sorry, Lord Yoshi," the Princess
said sweetly and silkily, "but it is so damp
in Yedo, the weather is not to compare with Ky@oto and
my husband's cough needs protection."
  "That is right, Yazu-chan, and I like it here,
Cousin, for the first time in my life I am free,
not confined in that awful castle! Here I am free
to roam and sing and play and feel safe, we are
safe. I may stay forever! Why not? Yedo is a
stinking, slimy place, to rule from here would be
grand."
  Yoshi had tried to reason with them but to no
avail. Then Nobusada had blurted out,
"What I need most of all, until I am of
age, not long now, Cousin, what I need is a
strong leader, a tair@o. Nori Anjo would be
perfect."
  "He would be very bad for you and the
Sh@ogunate," he had said and patiently
explained again but it had made no difference.
"Unwise to ma--"'
  "I do not agree, Cousin, Anjo
listens to me, to me, which you never do. I said I
wanted to bow before the Divine, my
brother-in-law, he agreed and I am here, you were
opposed! He listens to me! To me! To me, the
Sh@ogun! And don't forget anyone is better
than you. You will never be tair@o, never!"
  And he had left the two of them, never believing
--despite Nobusada's derisive,
infuriating laughter in his wake--that Tair@o
Anjo would ever become a fact.
  But now it is a fact, he thought gloomily,
conscious of the Lord Chancellor Wakura watching
him. "I will leave Ky@oto in the next few
days," he said, coming to a sudden decision.
  "But you have been here hardly any time, Sire,"
Wakura said, quietly congratulating himself.
"Surely our welcome has not been so
terrible?"
  "No, not terrible. So, what other distressing
pieces of information have you for me?"
  "None, Sire. So sorry I related
something that displeased you." Wakura rang a bell.
At once a painted pageboy came in with tea
and a plate of dates, his teeth also dyed black.
"Thank you, Omi." The boy smiled back at
him and left. "The dates are the sweetest
I've ever tasted. From Satsuma."
  They were large, honeyed and sun-dried.
Yoshi's eyes narrowed. He took one, no
coincidence they were from Satsuma. "They are
excellent."
  "Yes, they are. A pity the daimyo
Sanjiro is not as sweet as the food and fruit
his soldier farmers grow. Curious that samurai
in Satsuma can be either without loss of caste."
  Yoshi chose another. "Curious? Just their
ancient custom. A bad custom. Better that
men should be samurai or farmers, one or the other,
according to the Legacy."
  "Ah yes, the Legacy. But then Sh@ogun
Toranaga allowed that family to retain their
fief and their heads after Sekigahara though they
fought against him. Perhaps he liked their dates too.
Interesting, neh?"
  "Perhaps he was satisfied that they put their heads
to the dirt in front of him, humbly gave him
power over Satsuma, humbly swore
perpetual allegiance and, even more humbly,
thanked him when he gave Satsuma to them as
fief."
  "He was a wise ruler, very wise. But now the
Satsuma under Sanjiro are not so humble."
  "That is also true of others," Yoshi said
thinly.
  "As I said, we live in strange times."
Wakura took time to select another date.
"The rumor is he prepares his legions for
war, and fief for war."
  "Satsuma is always on a war footing.
Another ancient custom. You must tell me the
name of your supplier, of dates," Yoshi said.
"We could use a supplier, in Yedo."
  "Gladly," Wakura told him, knowing he
would never pass over his network of spies, never.
"Some wise advisors suggest this time Sanjiro
really will bring war to the mainland."
  "War against whom, Lord Chancellor?"
  "I presume those he considers enemies."
  "And who are they?" Yoshi asked patiently,
wanting to bring Wakura into the open.
  "It is rumored the Sh@ogunate, so
sorry."
  "He would be so sorry if he did try war
against the law of the land, Lord Chancellor. These
wise counselors you mentioned, perhaps they should quickly
counsel him not to be so stupid. Counselors can
also be stupid, neh?"
  "I agree." Wakura smiled with his mouth.
  "I agree that Sanjiro is militant, but
he is not stupid. Ogama of Choshu the same.
And Yodo of Tosa. All the Outside Lords
are militant and maneuvering, always have been--like
some misguided, overly ambitious Court
officials."
  "Even if that were true, what could a few
courtiers do against the great Sh@ogunate, Sire,
when the entire court possesses no armies, no
lands, and no koku, all of whom depend on
Sh@ogunate largess for stipends?"
  Yoshi smiled with equal mirthlessness. "They
spread discontent amongst ambitious daimyos
... Oh yes, that reminds me," he said,
deciding Wakura had gone too far and needed the
whip, "perhaps, in this marvelous enclave you may not
know it yet, but this year and next there will be famine
throughout Nippon, even in my Kwanto. It is
rumored the Court stipend will be cut, this year and
next, I believe by half." He was glad
to see Wakura's eyes almost cross. "So
sorry."
  "Yes, so sorry, it would be sorry, a
sorry day. Times are hard enough now." Wakura
fought back his impulse to shout and threaten, trying
to estimate Yoshi's power to initiate and force through
such a cut. He is not alone in wanting that,
daimyos are always complaining, and of course the
Council of Elders would agree. But Tair@o
Anjo would overrule them, why else is he there
but to do our bidding. Ogama? That arrogant dog,
would approve the cut, so would Sanjiro, and all
the others! Anjo had better overrule them!
  Wakura put on his best smile. "The
Prince Advisor asks if you would give him
your views in a memorial on Satsuma,
Choshu and Tosa, particularly the danger
Satsuma poses, and how in the future the
Court could help the Sh@ogunate--and avoid
misunderstandings."
  "I would be glad to." Yoshi said brightening.
This would be a wonderful opportunity.
  "Lastly, I'm honored to tell you the
Divine has invited you as His personal guest,
Sh@ogun Nobusada, some daimyos and those of
Tosa, Choshu, and Satsuma to the Festival
of the Winter Solstice. The Tosa and Satsuma
invitations have already gone, yours and the Lord Ogama's
will be presented with due ceremony tomorrow but I
wanted the pleasure of telling you."
  Yoshi was astonished for such was an extreme
honor for anyone outside the Inner Circle.
The solstice was this month--Twelfth Month--
twenty-second day. In sixteen days. The
festivities would last at least a week, perhaps
longer. He could leave afterwards, plenty of time
to deal with Anjo then.
  Wait! You have forgotten what the Legacy
says: Beware of camping in the Lair of
Heaven. It is not for us. We are men, they are
gods, gods are like people, jealous like people and closeness
breeds their contempt. The death of our line would
please these false gods very much. It can only
happen in their lair.
  Yoshi was filled with sudden dread. The invitation
could not be refused. "Thank you," he said and bowed.

  At midday the shishi lookout stationed
opposite the Toranaga barracks watched
idly as the forty samurai and banner men came out
of the gateway and went down the street towards the
palace East Gate. This was the
routine midday changing of the guard. Most carried
spears, all wore two swords, and rain
cloaks and wide, conical rain hats, all of
straw.
  The shishi yawned and pulled his own cloak around
his shoulders when a light shower began, shifting his
stool under the awning of the street stall that served
noodles and soup and tea and was owned by a
sympathizer. Soon his own replacement would
arrive. He had been on duty since dawn.
He was eighteen years old, his beard heavy. A
Satsuma ronin.
  Before sneaking out of Ky@oto their leader
Katsumata had ordered a constant surveillance
on the Toranaga and Ogama headquarters.
"The moment there is a chance to attack either man--
it will have to be outside their walls and must have a
reasonable chance of success--mount an immediate
one-man assault. One man, no more. Shishi
must be conserved, but we must be ready. A random
attack is our only way for revenge."
  At the gateway several porters carrying
bales of fresh vegetables and panniers of fresh
fish stopped at the barrier. Attentive guards
checked them carefully, then gestured them through,
everyone was inspected with equal care.
  The youth yawned again. No chance of sliding through
the cordon. He wondered briefly if the girl
Sumomo had managed to get inside and set herself
in place as Katsumata had agreed. Eeee,
a miracle those three escaped through the tunnel,
a miracle. But where are they now? Nothing had
been heard of them since their miraculous
escape. What does it matter? They must be
safe, like us--we have important patrons. We
will regroup later. We will be revenged.
Sonno-joi will happen.
  He saw the guards turn the corner and
disappear. Now he was tired, but the thought of warm
futons and his waiting lover took most of it
away.

  The Sh@ogunate patrol reached the East
Gate. A low barracks-guard house nestled
against the walls and spread on either side of the
Gate and could house five hundred men and
horses if need be. The Gate was six
metres high and made of heavy, iron reinforced
timber with a much smaller gate off to one side
standing open. The perimeter walls were
higher, ancient, and stone.
  For a moment the new guards noisily intermingled
with the old, all of them well muffled. Officers
inspected men and arms, the old guard began forming
up and an officer and an ashigari, a foot
soldier, from the replacement group trudged across
the roadway. The shower stopped. A little sun
broke through. The two men turned into another
street, and went into another barracks, similar
to many all over Ky@oto. Here two hundred of
Ogama's samurai were housed--well away from the
Gate, but close enough.
  "Forty men, here are their names," the officer said
to his counterpart and bowed. "Nothing new
to report."
  "Good. Both of you come with me please." The
Ogama officer studied the list of names as he led
the way down a corridor through a cordon of his
men. Through a doorway into an empty room, across
it to a closed door. The officer knocked, then
opened it. This inner room was bare but for a low table
and tatami mats. Ogama stood by the window,
armed, wary but alone. Both officers stood
aside and bowed.
  The ashigaru took off his large hat and
revealed himself as Yoshi. Silently he gave his
long sword to his officer, keeping the short one
and went into the room. The door closed behind him.
Both officers exhaled. Both were sweating.
  In the room Yoshi bowed. "Thank you for
agreeing to the meeting."
  Ogama bowed, motioned Yoshi to sit
opposite him. "What is so urgent and why such
secrecy?"
  "Bad news. You said partners should share
particular information. So sorry, Nori Anjo
has been made tair@o!"
  The news visibly shocked Ogama and he
listened intently as Yoshi talked. When Yoshi
spoke about the Imperial invitation some of his anger
dissipated. "Such an honor, and recognition!
Eeee, and none too soon."
  "That is what I thought. Until I was out of the
palace. Then I saw the depth of the trap."
  "What trap?"
  "To have the Lords of Satsuma, Tosa, you and
me all in one place at the same time? In
ceremonial clothes? Inside the palace
walls. Without arms or guards?"
  "What could Wakura do? Anyone of
them? They have no samurai--no armies, no
money, no arms. Nothing!"
  "Yes, but think: when we four are in front
of the Son of Heaven together, that would be perfect
timing for someone--Wakura, Prince
Fujitaka, Sh@ogun Nobusada, or the
Princess--to suggest "as a gift to the Divine
now is the moment for the four greatest daimyos in the
Land to express their loyalty by offering up their
powers to Him.""
  Ogama's brow darkened. "Not one of us would
agree, not one! We would prevaricate, stall,
even lie an--"
  "Lie? To the Son of Heaven? Never. Listen
further: say the Prince Advisor, before the
ceremony, in private, was to say to you something like:
"Lord Ogama, the Son of Heaven wishes
to adopt you, to make you Prince Ogama,
Captain of the Imperial Guard, Lord
Chieftain of the Gates, member of the New
Imperial Council of Ten who will rule instead
of the usurping Toranaga Sh@ogunate. In
return ...""
  "Eh? What Council of Ten?"
  "Wait. "... in return, you just acknowledge
Him as who He is: the Son of Heaven,
Emperor of Nippon, Possessor of the
Sacred Regalia--the Orb, Mirror and
Sceptre--descended from the gods and ascendent
over all men; in return you dedicate your fief
and your samurai to His service and His wishes that
will be exercised through the Imperial Council of
Ten!""
  Ogama stared at him, beads of sweat on his
upper lip. "I would ... would never give up
Choshu."
  "Perhaps, perhaps not. Perhaps the Imperial
Mouthpiece says, in addition the Emperor will
confirm you in your fief as Lord of Choshu,
Conqueror of the gai-jin, Keeper of the Straits,
subject only to Him, and the Imperial Council
of Ten."
  "Who else is on the Council?" Ogama
said hoarsely.
  Yoshi wiped the sweat off his own brow. The
whole scheme had suddenly presented itself when he
had reached his own barracks. General Akeda had
precipitated it with a chance remark about how
devious Ky@oto thinking was, that it seemed to be
in the very air they breathed, that what was
considered a prize in an instant became a
noose.
  He had become physically ill because he knew
he could be charmed as easily as anyone--he was
today, a few moments before, lulled into a false
sense of security until he would be isolated and
then invited onwards.
  "There, you see, Ogama-sama, you're already
tempted. Who else is on the Council? As
if what they told you mattered. You would be one
against their appointees, Sanjiro too. Lord
Chancellor Wakura and his ilk would overwhelm and
rule."
  "We would not agree. I would n--"
  "So sorry, you would agree--they could gear
honors to tempt a kami--the great temptation being
that they would pretend to replace the Toranaga
Sh@ogunate with the Council of Ten
Sh@ogunate! Of course I would not be offered a
place on the Imperial Council, nor any
Toranagas except Nobusada and he's already
theirs because of that Princess, as I warned." Yoshi
spat with rage. "Anjo is the first move."
  The more the two men considered the ramifications, the
more they could see the spikes of the limitless traps
ahead. Ogama said hoarsely, "The
festivities would go on for weeks or more--we would
be obliged to give banquets to the Court and
to each other. Slow poisons could be introduced."
  Yoshi shuddered. All of his life he had
carried a deep fear of being poisoned. A
favorite uncle had died in great pain, the
doctor saying "natural causes," but the
uncle had been a barb in the side of a hostile
Bakufu and his death a great convenience. Perhaps
poisoning perhaps not. The death of the previous
Sh@ogun the year Perry returned, one day
healthy the next dead, again so convenient to the
Tair@o Ii who hated him, wanting a
puppet--Nobusada--in his place.
  Rumors, never proof, but poison was an
ancient art in Nippon, and China. The more
Yoshi reasoned with himself--if death by poisoning was
his karma--the more he made sure his cooks were
trustworthy and took care where he ate. But that
did not remove the panic that possessed him now
and then.
  Abruptly Ogama bunched a fist and smashed
it into the palm of his other hand. "Anjo tair@o!
I cannot believe it."
  "Nor I." When Yoshi had sent the
messenger to arrange this secret meeting he had
been thinking how ironic it was that now he and
Ogama really had to work together if they were
to survive. No longer could they survive alone.
At the moment.
  "How do we stop this happening? I can see they
could tempt me." Ogama spat on the tatami
in disgust.
  "They can tempt anyone, Ogama-dono."
  "They are like wolf kamis, I can understand that.
We are trapped. If the Divine invites us,
His befouled minions will destroy us. Let us round
up those you spoke of, or ... I'll send for
Basuhiro, his mind is like a serpent's!"
  "We are only trapped if we accept the
invitation tomorrow. I propose we both leave
Ky@oto tonight, secretly. If we are not here
... eh?" Ogama's sudden smile was seraphic
but it evaporated as quickly. Yoshi understood why,
and said, "Such a move requires great trust between
us."
  "Yes, yes it would. What do you propose
to, to guard against any mistakes?"
  "I cannot cover all alternatives but this is
temporary: we both slip out of Ky@oto tonight,
agreeing to stay away for at least twenty days.
I will go at once to Yedo and deal with, or
neutralize Anjo, and stay there until that is
done. General Akeda will be in charge as usual
who will say that I had to return suddenly
to Dragon's Tooth, a sickness in the family,
but I am expected back quickly. You go
to Fushimi and spend the night there. At sunset
tomorrow, after the invitation has failed to reach you--because
no one, not even Basuhiro knows where you are,
eh?"
  "Too dangerous not to tell him, but go on."
  "I leave that to you but at sunset tomorrow you
deliver a message to Prince Fujitaka
inviting him to a private meeting the next
morning, say at the Monoyama ruins"--a
favorite sightseeing place for Ky@oto people.
"When you see him you express astonishment at the
"Invitation" and regret not being there to accept it.
Meanwhile he had better ensure no more
invitations arrive until you return. "When will
that be?"' You are not sure. The gai-jin have
threatened to land at Osaka imminently. You must
visit there and make plans.
Meanwhile make it clear to him that there better not
be any more sudden Imperial Invitations--however
much you humbly appreciate them--until you
decide you will accept them."
  Ogama grunted. He stared at the tatami
lost in thought. Then he said, "What about
Sanjiro, and Yodo of Tosa? They will be
arriving, in ceremonial force, but still force."
  "Tell Fujitaka to make sure their
invitations are postponed--he should suggest to the
Divine this solstice has bad omens attached
to it."
  "A good suggestion! But if they will not be put
off?"
  "Fujitaka will make sure they are."
  "If it is that easy, why not stay, even with the
Invitations? I just tell Fujitaka to make the
suggestion about the bad omens. The Festival is
cancelled, eh? This supposes Fujitaka has
the power to suggest or unsuggest."
  "With Wakura he can. I believe Ky@oto
deviousness is in the air we breathe--we would be
snared." This was the best he could do. It did not
suit his purpose for Ogama to be here alone, and
there were still the Gates to solve.
  "I could stay at Fujimi, or Osaka for
twenty days," Ogama said slowly. "I could not
return to Choshu, that would leave my Ky@oto
... that would leave me open to attack."
  "From whom? Not me--we are allies. Hiro
will not be here, or Sanjiro. You could journey
to Choshu if you wished. Basuhiro could be trusted
to hold your position here."
  "No vassal could be trusted that much," Ogama
said sourly. "What about the shishi?"
  "Basuhiro and my Akeda will continue to crush
them--our Bakufu spies will continue to seek them
out."
  Ogama scowled. "The more I think about this the
less I like it. Too many dangers,
Yoshi-dono. Fujitaka is sure to tell me
your invitation was not delivered either."
  "You will be surprised, I suggest you can say
my excuse about an illness must be a cover and that
I must be rushing to Yedo to see what I can do
to prevent the gai-jin from putting their threat to come
to Ky@oto into effect--and to ensure they quit
Yokohama." His face hardened. "They will not."
  Ogama said roughly, "Then we will make them."
  "In due time, Ogama-dono."
Yoshi became even harder. "Everything I forecast
has happened. Believe me, the gai-jin will not be
forced out. Not yet."
  "Then when?"
  "Soon. This problem must be left for the moment.
First of importance is to protect ourselves. Two
asks: We must leave together and return together.
We stay secret allies until formally,
person to person and alone, we decide
otherwise." Ogama laughed but said nothing.
"Last, while I am gone, our agreement over
the Gates stays in place."
  "Your mind jumps around like a cat with thorns in
its pads." Ogama cleared his throat and shifted
his knees more comfortably. "Perhaps I agree, perhaps
not. This is too important to decide at
once. I must talk with Basuhiro."
  "No. Talk to me. I can give better
advice because I know more and, importantly, in this
your interests are mine--and I am not a vassal
who has to seek petty favors."
  "Only big ones. Like the Gates."
  Yoshi laughed. "That is a little one compared to some
you will grant me, and I will grant you, when you're
tair@o."
  "Then give me one now while I'm not:
Sanjiro's head."
  Yoshi looked at him, hiding his surprise.
He had not forgotten what Inejin, his innkeeper
spy on the road to Dragon's Tooth, had
told him about Ogama and "Crimson Sky."
Inejin spoke of how, with Sanjiro in
support, or neutral, Ogama would prevail
against the Sh@ogunate with the historic tactic so
favored by daimyos, a sneak attack.
  "Would you settle for his balls?" Yoshi asked
and laid out the plan he had been refining for
months.
  Ogama began to laugh.

  The column of guards that had been relieved
trudged homewards, four men abreast, Yoshi still
disguised as a foot soldier amongst them. Although
they had been warned in advance to treat him as such,
they were finding it difficult not to sneak a glance,
or apologize when coming too close. One of the
soldiers was a shishi informer named Wataki. He
had had no opportunity to warn of this unique
opportunity for an ambush.
  Yoshi was tired but content. At
length Ogama had agreed to everything so now he could
leave Ky@oto with the Gates safe in
Sh@ogunate hands and the Sh@ogunate safe.
  For a time--enough time, he thought. My gamble is
great, and my scheme filled with holes that will
worry Ogama if he sees them. It does not
matter, surely he plans to betray me
anyway. Never mind, it was the best I could do, and
should be workable. Impossible for me to accept the
Invitation.
  The day had improved now, the sun jousting with
clouds for possession of the sky. He hardly
noticed it or his surroundings, his mind occupied with
all the details of his departure, who to tell,
what to do about Koiko and General Akeda, who
to take with him, and his overall concern: would he be in
time to minimize the damage in Yedo?
  First a bath and massage, decisions afterwards
...
  His eyes focused and he became aware of the
streets as they marched along, the pedestrians,
stalls and ponies and kagas and palanquins, the
houses and hovels and stalls and children and fish
sellers and hawkers and soothsayers and scribes
and all the bustle of the markets. It was a
completely new experience for him to be one of many,
incognito in the column, and he began to enjoy this
completely different perspective. Soon he was
gawking like a country person at the sights and
sounds and smells of the city he had never seen before,
wanting to stop, to intermingle with the crowds,
to experience them, what they thought and did and ate and
where they slept. "Soldier," he whispered to the
young man beside him. "Where do you go when you're off
duty?"
  "More-me, Lord?" the man stuttered, and almost
dropped his spear, appalled at being talked to by the
Most High, wanting to kneel at once. "Me,
I ... go and drink, Sire ..."
  "Don't call me "Sire,"" Yoshi
hissed, startled by the sudden confusion his question had
caused in all those nearby, some of whom missed
their footing and almost broke ranks. "Act
normally--do not look at me! All of you!"
  The soldier offered apologies, and those nearby
tried to do what he had ordered, finding it almost
impossible now that their Lord Yoshi had broken the
spell of invisibility. The Sergeant glanced
around and came back anxiously. "Everything all
right, Lord? Is ev--"
  "Yes, yes, Sergeant. Return to your
post!"
  Automatically the Sergeant bowed and obeyed,
the soldiers picked up their step and continued
onwards--their barracks a hundred metres
ahead. To Yoshi's relief this minor confusion
went unnoticed by the crowd alongside who had
been bowing as the column passed.
  But it had been noticed by two men further down
the street. They were the shishi lookout, Ruru, and
his replacement, Rushan, a young Tosa ronin,
who had that moment arrived at the street stall not
far from the Toranaga gateway. "Am I
drunk, Rushan? A sergeant bowing to a foot
soldier. A sergeant?"
  "I saw it too, Izuru," the other
whispered. "Look at the soldier. There, you can
see him now, the tall one near the back, look
how he carries his spear. He is not used to it."
  "Right, but ... What is it about him, eh?"
  "See how the others watch him without watching!"
  With growing excitement they scrutinized the
soldier intently as the column approached.
Though the soldier's weapons were the same and
uniform and everything the same, there was no mistaking
a major difference: in carriage, step, the
physical qualities of the man, however much he
pretended to slouch.
  "Lord Yoshi," both men said
simultaneously, and Rushan added at once,
"He's mine."
  "No, mine," Izuru said.
  "I saw him first!" Rushan whispered,
committed, so impatient he could hardly talk.
  "Both of us, together we have a better chance."
  "No, keep your voice down. One man one
time, that was Katsumata's order and we agreed.
He is mine. Signal me when!" Heart
pumping, Rushan eased through the pedestrians and
other customers to a better attack position.
They bowed politely, taking him for one of the many,
ordinary, low-rank samurai off duty from one
of the ceremonial garrisons and gave him no more
attention, preparing to bow to the approaching column.
  Rushan's new position was on the edge of the
roadway. A last look to place his quarry.
Then he sat on a stool with his back towards the
column, eyes on his friend Izuru, completely
at peace. His death poem for his parents was in the
hands of his village shoya, given
years ago when he and ten other student samurai
had rebelled. They were all goshi and had
rebelled when they were refused entrance to the school
for higher education--their parents could not afford the necessary
bribes to local officials. They had killed the
officials, declared themselves ronin and for
sonno-joi, and fled.
  Of the ten, he alone was still alive. Soon
to die, he thought gloriously, knowing he was
prepared, trained, at the height of his power and that
Izuru would be his witness.
  Izuru was just as ardent. He had already decided
on his own attack plan if Rushan failed.
Confidently, he moved into a better spot. His
gaze left the patrol and went to the gateway.
Guards were preparing for the ritual of checking the
others back through the barricade. At once he
noticed there was more bustling, and barking orders than
usual, the men smarter and more nervous.
  He cursed to himself. They know! Of course they
know and have known since the column left! That
explains why they have been so jittery and irritable
all morning. They all knew Lord Yoshi was
loose outside and in disguise. But why? And
where's he been? Ogama! But why? were they
planning another ambush on us? Are we betrayed
again?
  All the time his eyes darted back and forth, never
forgetting Rushan, gauging distances and timing.
Already many pedestrians and shoppers close by were
bowing. Any moment the officer would halt the
column, the officer of the gate would come to meet
him, both would bow, together they would inspect the
incoming men and then they would all march away.
  The officer held up his hand. The column
shuffled to a halt. "Now," Izuru said almost
audibly, and gestured. Rushan saw the signal
and dashed for the tail of the column twenty metres
away, his long sword poised in a two-handed
grip.
  He burst through the first two men sending them
sprawling before they or any of the soldiers realized
they were being attacked, and hacked at Yoshi who
stared at him blankly for a split second.
Only Yoshi's honed instinct made him lurch
towards the death blow, diverting it into a stupefied
soldier beside him who screamed and went down.
  Shrieking "sonno-joi" in the sudden shouting
melee around him, Rushan jerked the blade out as
soldiers fought for space, shoving each
other out of the way, other guards rushing from the
gateway, bystanders everywhere gaping and paralyzed,
Wataki, the shishi informer, as surprised as any
of the soldiers, and terrified he would become
involved or betrayed by this shishi he recognized
who had appeared out of nowhere.
  Wataki saw Rushan strike again and held his
breath. But Yoshi had recovered his balance though
had no time yet to draw his sword so he used the
haft of his spear against the blow. Rushan's
sword sliced through it easily but the blade
twisted and slowed slightly, giving Yoshi just enough
time to lunge and grab the sword hilt
left-handed.
  At once Rushan's right hand flashed to his
short sword, ripped it out and stabbed for the belly,
a classic gambit in hand-to-hand fighting. Again
Yoshi was prepared. He had let the spear fall
and jammed his right forearm against Rushan's wrist
to deflect the blade into his cloak to entangle
it. Instantly Rushan let go and his hand, now a
murderous weapon with fingers like rock-hard
talons, and nails like claws, stabbed for
Yoshi's eyes. The nails missed the eyes but
sank in below them.
  Yoshi gasped. A lesser trained man would have
released his grip on his assailant's long
sword hilt and would have died. Blindly he hung
on, now with two hands, to the man who flayed
impotently, out of control now. This gave a
soldier behind Rushan the opening to grab him around the
throat, and Wataki, knowing the fight was lost and
petrified the shishi would be captured alive,
thankfully drove his short sword into Rushan's
lower back. The strength of the blow thrust the blade
right through him. Rushan cried out. Blood seeped
from his mouth, but he fought on though blind with death that
soared upwards and outwards and ended. Barely a
minute had passed since the first attack.
  Though his own glands generated panic, Yoshi
felt the life go out of the man. And the sudden weight
of the body against him. But he did not let go
until he was completely sure the man was truly
dead. Even then he allowed other hands to pull the
corpse away and let it fall.
  Blood covered him. He discovered quickly that it
was not his. His good fortune did not dissipate his
fury at the men nearby who had failed to be
alert, failed to move into a protective
screen, leaving him to do the fighting. He
cursed them, ordering the whole troop inside, on
their knees, their swords broken, except the
two who had helped him. Then, panting, he
looked around. The busy street was almost empty.
  When the shouting, milling skirmish surrounding the
lone attacker was seen to be what it was, and in
seconds Yoshi's hat torn off and he was
recognized, a hum of astonishment had gone through
the common folk. At once, two or three
sidled away, heads averted. Others followed.
The cautious dribble became a floodtide, no
one wanting to be held as a witness or even
accused of being an accomplice.
  Izuru was one of the first to leave when he saw there
was no reasonable expectation a second attack
would succeed. Rushan mishandled the attack, he
thought, walking down the predetermined side
street, well shielded by departing crowds. The
fool should have hacked the head off one of the first two
as a diversion, then on the recovery used the same
fluid, brutal force to swing back on the prime
target, waist-high. No likelihood of
Yoshi escaping that blow. None. Katsumata
would be furious, he demonstrated it enough times,
told us enough times. A unique opportunity
wasted! And as for allowing Yoshi to catch his hilt
and parry the belly thrust ...
  Rushan deserved to be captured alive and
used for sword practice! Wait, perhaps it was
better this way. If Rushan was so inept in his
supreme duel, he probably would have broken and
given away our safe houses, the ones he knew
about. You can't trust Tosa people, shishi or not!
  But why was Toranaga Yoshi taking such a
risk?
  There were shouts behind him. Soldiers were chasing the
last of the crowds to catch some as witnesses. No
chance that he would be caught, no need to hurry.
  Rain began again. The wind picked up. He
pulled his cloak around him, glad for it and his
hat. Down another puddled alley, into another,
across a bridge, the wooden slats slippery.
Soon he was safe in a maze of slippery little
streets that led to a back entrance in the wall of a
great dwelling. The guard recognized him, let
him pass, waving him toward the secret shishi
safe house lost in the vast gardens. The man's
uniform carried the insignia of Lord Chancellor
Wakura.
  In the street of the Toranaga
Headquarters the stall keeper was being hustled to the
guard house, loudly protesting that he knew
nothing, was nothing and begged to be allowed to go--he
had dared not vanish with the others as he was too well
known there. A few stragglers who had been caught
were shoved after him. The awning of the stall flapped
miserably in the wind and rain.

  Koiko was putting the final touches to her
makeup helped by a hand mirror of polished
steel. Her fingers shook slightly. Again she
made a conscious effort to empty her mind and
compartmentalize her fears, for Yoshi and because of him,
for herself and because of herself. The other two women,
Teko, her maiko--apprentice--and Sumomo
watched intently. The room was small and
functional, like the rest of the suite adjoining
Yoshi's quarters, sufficient for her when she
slept alone, and one maid. Other quarters, for
her attendants, were further away.
  As she finished she stared at her reflection.
She could detect no worry lines and when she
tried a smile the skin of her face crinkled
only in the correct places, her eyes were
white where they should be white, dark where they should be
dark and showed none of the depth of her concern. This
pleased her. Then she caught a glimpse of
Sumomo. Not aware she was observed,
Sumomo's face was momentarily open.
Koiko's stomach twisted, seeing so many
conflicts there.
  Training training training, she thought, what would
we do without it, and turned to face them. Teko,
little more than a child, took the mirror without being
asked, deftly touched a vagrant lock
into place with a tiny hand.
  "It's beautiful, Lady Koiko,"
Sumomo said, bewitched. This was the first time she had
been allowed into Koiko's private quarters.
The secrets of the beauty process had been a
revelation, beyond her whole experience.
  "Yes, it is," Koiko said, thinking she
meant the mirror, the perfection of its surface
making it almost priceless. "And it is a kind
mirror too. Few are kind, Sumomo--
vital in this life for a woman to have a kind
mirror to look into."
  "Oh, I meant the whole picture you make,
not that," Sumomo said, embarrassed. "From your
kimono to your hairstyle, your choice
of colors and how you make up your lips and
eyebrows, everything. Thank you for allowing me
to witness it."
  Koiko laughed. "I hope that with, or without,
the effect is not too different!"
  "Oh, you are the most beautiful person I have
ever seen," Sumomo burst out. Compared to Koiko
she felt like a country person,
unsophisticated, inept, bovine, all fingers and
elbows and big feet, for the first time in her life
conscious of a lack of femininity. What can my
beloved Hiraga see in me, she asked herself
dismayed. I'm nothing, unattractive, nothing,
not even a Choshu like him. I bring him no face,
no lands, no prestige and no money, I'm
sure in truth his parents disapprove of me. "You
are the, the most beautiful I'm ever likely
to see!" she said and she was thinking, Are all
Ladies of the Floating World like you? Even the
maiko will be stunning when she is grown though not like
her Mistress! No wonder men marry women like
me just to control their houses and bear their children, because it
is so easy for them to worship elsewhere, to enjoy
beauty elsewhere and oh so much more.
  With the sincerity Koiko saw the unhappiness and
envy that could not be hidden. "You are beautiful too,
Sumomo," she said, long aware she had this
effect on many women. "Teko-chan, you may go
now but prepare everything for later ... and make
sure we are not disturbed, Sumomo and I."
  "Yes, Mistress." Teko was eleven. As
with Koiko, her contract had been concluded with the
mama-san of the House of Wisteria by her farmer
parents when she was seven. Her earning life would
begin when she was fourteen or fifteen. Till
then, and as long as the mama-san wanted, the
contract made the mama-san responsible for
keeping her, clothing her, and training her for a life
in the Floating World, and, if she developed the
aptitude, in its various arts: as musician
or dancer or poet or conversationalist, or all
of them. If the maiko proved untrainable or
difficult, the mama-san could resell the
contract at her whim, but if her choice had been
wise, as with Koiko, the mama-san's considerable
financial outlay and gamble would be repaid
abundantly in money and reputation. Not all
mama-sans were considerate, or kind, or
patient.
  "Run along now and practice your
scales," Koiko said.
  "Yes Mistress." Teko knew she had
been blessed to be apprenticed to Koiko whom she
adored and worked very hard to please. She bowed
perfectly and, adorned by an irrepressible
charm, went away.
  "S." Koiko looked at Sumomo,
uneasily fascinated by her, her direct look
and manner and strength. Since she had agreed
to allow her to stay five days ago, there had been
almost no opportunity to talk alone. Now it was
time. She opened a mental compartment:
Katsumata.
  Oh my friend, what have you done to me?
  He had waylaid her during her visit to the
Ky@oto mama-san who had, at the instigation of
Meikin, her own mama-san in Yedo, arranged
maids, hairdresser, masseuses while she was
here. Only Teko and a maid had travelled with
her from Yedo.
  "I ask a lifetime favor,"
Katsumata had said.
  "No, you must not!" she had said, shocked
to see him, shocked that he would endanger her with such
a clandestine meeting and shocked that he would ask such
a favor of her that surely must have dire
consequences. Once granted, no other favor
could ever be asked of the same person, the ensuing
debt enormous. "We agreed when Lord
Toranaga Yoshi honored me, all personal
contacts between us should cease, except in an
emergency. We agreed."
  "Yes, hence the lifetime favor I ask."
  Seven years ago, in Yedo, when she was
fifteen, Katsumata had been her first client.
Quickly he had become a lot more: friend, guru and
consummate teacher. He had opened her eyes to the
world, to the importance of the real world, as well as the
Floating World. Over the years he had taught
her the tea ceremony, the art of debating,
calligraphy, about poetry and inner meanings of
literature, politics, and regaled her with his
ideas and plans for the future, how his small band
of acolyte samurai would dominate the land, would
force through sonno-joi, and, in time, showed her how
there was a vital place for her in the jigsaw
called sonno-joi. "As a courtesan of
supreme rank you will be a confidante of the
powerful, as wife of one of them, you'll marry one,
never fear, and have samurai sons and be
indispensable to the new future and a major part of
its power, never forget it!"
  Meikin, her mama-san, was an adherent so of
course she had agreed, her imagination devoured
by his bravery and daring and his band of shishi, the
rise of their fortunes.
  "Our fortunes have ebbed," he had said and
told her about the ambush last night and his escape
with two others. "We were betrayed--I do not know
by whom but we have to scatter--for the time being."
  "Forty shishi spiked?"' she whispered,
appalled.
  "Forty. Most of them leaders. Only three
of us escaped, another shishi and a girl--a ward
of mine. Listen, Koiko-chan, there's not much
time. The lifetime favor I ask is for you
to guard this girl while you stay in Ky@oto,
take her into your household, even back to Yedo
with you an--"'
  "Oh but as much as I would like to, so sorry that
would be very difficult, the General Akeda is very
particular about people. He would personally interview
her--he did with all my other helpers," she
said as nicely as she could, inwardly horrified that
he dared to make such a dangerous suggestion to her
that she harbor a shishi escapee, however
innocent, "it would be very diff--"'
  "Of course it would be difficult. But you will be
able to arrange this without having him see her."
  "I do not think that possible and then there is Lord
Yoshi." She had left that hanging,
frantically hoping he would withdraw the favor but
he had continued softly, watching her with his intense,
compelling eyes, saying that Sumomo would be safe
with her, that she was samurai, the affianced of a very
important shishi, a woman to be trusted:
"So sorry but I ask you do this for
sonno-joi, she is to be trusted. Any
problem, send her away. Any task she will do
... sorry, Koiko-chan I must go. A
lifetime favor, as an old friend."
  "Wait. If ... I will have to consult with
General Akeda, but even if he can be avoided,
certainly I must ask my household, I will have
to consult them of course, but what am I to say about
her? To the General or to them, I do not know these
Ky@oto people, or anything about them."
  "Their mama-san guarantees they are to be
trusted," he had said with utter conviction. "I
asked her and she approves of this,
Koiko, or I would not suggest it. Tell them the
truth, that Sumomo is simply a headstrong
girl and her guardian--an old, old client--
wants her curbed and trained in useful, feminine
arts. I cannot take her with me and want her
protected. I have an obligation to her fianc`e.
She will obey you in everything."
  Koiko trembled at the danger she had put
herself into, as well as those she was responsible for,
Teko and her attendants: four maids, a
hairdresser, and a masseuse. Fortunately they
had agreed to have this stranger in their midst and to help
her to change her ways--and Akida's scrutiny
had failed to detect any flaw.
  Ah, Katsumata, you knew I could refuse
you nothing, she thought. Curious how quickly you went
beyond needing my body, a few months, wanting
instead to possess and expand my mind. I'm still
bound by hoops of iron, deep in your debt.
Without you and the knowledge you gave me I would not be at the
pinnacle I am now--and able to beguile the greatest
man in the land.
  "Sit down, Sumomo," she said. "We have a
little time now before I have to go. We can not be overheard
here."
  "Thank you."
  "My attendants are concerned about you."
  "Please excuse me if I have not been
correct."
  Koiko smiled. "The maids wonder if you have
a tongue in your head, all agree your gentility
needs improving, and all can understand a guardian
wanting you improved."
  "I need improving," Sumomo said, smiling.
  Koiko's eyes crinkled. The young woman
opposite her was not unattractive, her body
lithe and strong, the face without makeup, the bloom
of youth and health making up for that deficiency.
Her hair is in good condition but needs styling, she
thought critically. The Ky@oto style would suit
her, lots of good oils on her hands and arms, some
shading on her fine cheekbones, a touch of color
on her lips. The girl has promise. We
must bathe together and then I would know more though I doubt
she could adapt to our life even if she wanted
to adapt. "You are a virgin, yes?"
  She saw the girl flush and laughed outright.
"Ah so sorry, of course you are, for a moment I
forgot that you are not of our world. Please excuse
me, but it is rare for us to meet
outsiders, let alone a samurai lady, and to have
one in your household however briefly, that is
almost unknown."
  "Is, is that what you call us? Outsiders?"
  "Yes. Our Floating World sets us apart.
Take little Teko. Soon her other life will have
vanished and she will know only mine. That is my
duty, to train her and keep her gentle and kind,
to sacrifice herself for man's pleasure--not at
her impulse." Koiko's eyes took on a
sheen. "That is what keeps men happy and content,
pleasure in all its manifestations, neh?"
  "Sorry, I don't understand
"manifestations"."
  "Ah, so sorry, it means "appearances, or
qualities," to show pleasure in all its
degrees."
  "Ah, thank you," Sumomo said awed.
"Please excuse me, I never knew that
ladies of the, the Floating World were so ... of
course I presumed they were beautiful, but never,
never as beautiful as you and never dreamed they could be
so well educated and accomplished." In the few
days she had been here she had heard Koiko
singing, and playing the samisen and had been inspired
by the peerless quality and her repertoire--she too
could play the samisen, just a little, and knew how
difficult it was. She had heard her teaching
Teko the art of haiku and other poetry, how
to caress a phrase, about silks, how they are
made, the warp and the weft and other mysteries, the
beginnings of history and similar wonders, her
range of knowledge vast. She bowed in tribute. "You
astonish me, Lady."
  Koiko laughed softly. "Learning is the most
important part of our work. It's easy
to satisfy a man's body--such a transient
delight--but difficult to pleasure him for any
length of time, to intrigue him and retain his
favor. That must come through the senses of the mind.
To achieve that one must train oneself extremely
carefully. You must begin to do that too."
  ""When there are cherry blossoms to admire,
who would look at carrot tops"?"
  "When a man is hungry he seeks carrots
and not cherry blossoms and he is more hungry than
not." Koiko waited amused. She saw
Sumomo drop her eyes, at a loss.
  "Carrots are peasant food, Lady,"
Sumomo said in a small voice.
"So sorry."
  "Cherries are an acquired taste, as are their
flowers. Carrots can take on many flavors,
if properly treated." Again she waited but
Sumomo still looked down. "Not in riddles, so you
will not be confused, it is not sex that is really sought
by men in my World, but romance--our most forbidden
fruit."
  Sumomo was startled. "It is?"
  "Oh yes, for us. It is poisonous. Men
seek romance in your world too, most men, and it is
not forbidden you, is it?"
  "No."
  "Your future husband is no different, he
seeks romance too, wherever it is available.
Better you make as much available at home as you
can, for as long as you can." Koiko smiled. "Then
you have can have cherries and fine carrots. The
flavors can be acquired, easily."
  "Then please teach me."
  "Tell me about this man, your husband-to-be."
  "His name is Oda, Rokan Oda,"
Sumomo said at once, using the cover name
Katsumata had given her. "His father is a
goshi ... and he comes from Kanagawa in
Satsuma."
  "And your father?"
  "It is as I said, Lady. He is of the line
Fujahito," she said, using her new cover
surname, "they are also from a village nearby and
also goshi."
  "Your guardian says this Rokan Oda is
important."
  "He is too kind, Lady, though
Oda-sama is shishi and did take part in the
attack on Lord Anjo at Yedo's gates, and
also killed the Elder Utani." Katsumata
had told her it was safer to tell the truth where
possible, the fewer the lies to remember.
  "Where is he now?"
  "At Yedo, Lady."
  "How long do you want to stay with me?"
  "For me, Lady, as long as I can. My
guardian said Ky@oto was dangerous for me. I
cannot return home, my father disapproves of me as
he had told you, as Oda-sama's parents
disapprove of him, so sorry because of me."
  Koiko frowned. "That will make life
impossible."
  "Yes. Karma is karma and what
is to be will be. Though I am of no value
to anyone and believe I am unknown to the
Bakufu, Sensei Katsumata approves of
my Oda-sama, accepted the responsibility.
He said I'm to obey you in all things."
  "Better to obey your parents, Sumomo."
  "Yes, I know, but my Oda-sama forbids
it."
  A good answer, Koiko thought, seeing the
pride and the conviction. Saddened, she glanced at the
half-opened window. Surely this forbidden romance
would end like so many others. In suicide. Together if
Sumomo was blessed. Or her alone when, as this
Oda should, he obeys his parents and takes a
wife acceptable to them.
  She sighed. In the garden outside, twilight
was becoming night. A slight wind. "The leaves
are whispering one to another. What are they saying?"
  Sumomo covered her surprise and began
to listen. At length she said, "So sorry, I do
not know."
  "Listen while I am gone. It is
important to know what leaves whisper. Tonight you will
stay here, Sumomo. Perhaps I will return, perhaps
not. If I do then we will talk some more, and you will
tell me. If not we will continue tomorrow and you will
tell me then. When Teko comes back to prepare
the futons tell her I want you both to compose
a haiku." She thought a moment and then smiled.
"A haiku about a snail."

  "Hello, Koiko," Yoshi said listlessly.
His back was to the wall, his hand near his sword and
he wore a yukata of purple silk.
Outwardly he appeared calm but she saw through him
and knew him to be lonely, frightened and in need of
other skills.
  Her smile was enough to brighten the blackest day.
At once she saw his eyes soften. Good, first
hurdle. "Now," she said, with pretended
gravity, "I have a poem for you:

"It is not easy
To be sure which
End is which of
A resting snail!"

  His laugh resounded around the room.
  Good, second hurdle. "I'm so pleased you
allowed me to come to Ky@oto with you." His
eyes took on the other glow and her soul warmed.
Instinctively she changed what she was going
to say, that he was so handsome in the flickering night
lights. Instead she said what was deep within her:

Those were sad times
When, without you,
I watched days come up
And go down again.

  She was kneeling opposite him and he reached out
and caught her hand. No need for words. For him or
for her. Now he was at peace, tension gone,
loneliness gone and all fear. And she was at peace
too. So much energy expended to take him out of
himself. So much revealed. Unwise to reveal so
much.
  You are very important to me, he was saying without
saying it, speaking as lovers will.
  You do me too much honor, she replied with a
tiny frown. Then her fingers, delicately
caressing the back of his hand said, I adore thee.
  Eyes locked with eyes. She raised his hand and
brushed her lips against it. Silence gripping them,
beginning to hurt, hurting and then in one swift
movement, she slipped over to his side and
embraced him tightly. Her laugh trilled.
"Too much serious is bad for me,
Tora-chan!" She hugged him again, nestling
into his embrace. "You make me so happy."
  "Ah, no more than I," he murmured, glad
the tension was broken so nicely. "You are adored
and so are your poems."
  "The one about the snail was by Kyorai."
  He laughed. "It is by Koiko the Lily!
Is, not was."
  Again she nestled closer, enjoying his warmth and
strength. "I nearly died when I heard about this
morning."
  "Life," he said simply. "I should have been
more prepared but I was fascinated by the street."
He told her how different it had seemed. "It
was a rare experience--the feeling of invisibility
--too good not to sample again, however dangerous.
Does the danger add a spice to it? I will
experiment in Yedo. At night it would be easier
and I will train special guards to accompany
me."
  "Please excuse me, but I would suggest you
partake of that drug sparingly."
  "I mean to." His arms held her, both of
them comfortable. "It could develop into that, yes,
easily."
  The room adjoined his sleeping quarters. Like the
whole barracks complex it was masculine, with
minimum furniture, the tatami first quality but
in need of replacement. I won't be displeased
to leave this place, he thought. Their ears caught the
pad of approaching feet, his hand snaked to his
sword hilt. Both of them tensed. "Sire?" a
muffled voice said.
  "What is it?" Yoshi said.
  "So sorry to disturb you, Sire, a letter has
just arrived, from Dragon's Tooth."
  Without needing to be asked, Koiko went to the
side of the door out of the way and stood there on
guard. Yoshi readied. "Open the door,
sentry," he called out. The door slid opened.
The sentry hesitated seeing Yoshi in a
defense-attack position, sword loose in its
scabbard. "Give the scroll to Lady
Koiko." The sentry obeyed then went away
again. When he had reached the end of the corridor and
had gone through that door, Koiko closed this one.
She handed him the scroll and knelt in her place
opposite. He broke the seal.
  The letter from his wife asked after his health and gave
news that his sons and the rest of his family were well
and looking forward to his return. Then the information
began:

The prospectors have been travelling
diligently with your vassal Misamoto. As
yet they have found no gold but report large--the
word they used was "huge"--deposits of high
quality coal, easy to mine and near the
surface. I understand them to say this is "black
gold" and could be profitably bartered with the
gai-jin for money. They continue to search. We
hear Anjo had been made tair@o and
boasts that you will soon be invited to retire from the
Council of Elders. Next, the confidant you
visited on the way to Ky@oto tells the
following: the code word he gave you about an enemy
is correct and that a similar plan is ready as
the enemy's state policy.

  Crimson Sky. So a lightning attack is
"State Policy"! Will my agreement with
Ogama hold?
  He put that question aside for later and continued
reading:

The ronin, Ori, who became a gai-jin
spy, is dead in the gai-jin camp. The other
ronin, Hiraga, is believed to be there also.
Your spy says also he intercepted the "maid"
you sent back, as ordered, and sent her far north
to a very poor brothel. Her ronin lover was
killed.

  Yoshi smiled. This was Koiko's maid who
had whispered of Utani's secret tryst to her
ronin shishi. Halfway to Ky@oto he had
dismissed her, sending her back to Yedo on some
imagined slight--of course Koiko had not
objected. Good, he thought. Utani is revenged
in some small measure.

  Next, the Gyokoyama: I have completed
money matters. May I use the coal
possibility as a further pledge for any
armaments ordered? Perhaps we should try to deal with the
gai-jin direct, perhaps using Misamoto?
Please give me your council. Sire, your
presence and wise advice is greatly missed.
Last, so sorry, famine has begun.

  Yoshi re-read it. Knowing Hosaki so well,
the way she had used "further pledge" meant that
the negotiation had been rough and the price high.
Never mind, next year there will be no famine and the
Gyokoyamas, if they live that long in lands I
control, will be repaid.
  He looked up at Koiko. She was staring
into space, lost in dreams he knew he could never
share. "Koiko?"
  "Oh. Yes, Sire?"
  "What were you thinking about?"
  "What leaves whisper to leaves."
  Intrigued he said, "It depends on the
tree."
  She smiled sweetly. "A maple, a
blood-red maple."
  "In what season?"
  "Ninth month."
  "If they were watching us they whispered, "Soon
we fall, never to return, But they are blessed.
They grow on the tree of life. Their blood our
blood.""
  She clapped her hands, smiling at him.
"Perfect. And if it was a pine in spring?"
  "Not now, Koiko-chan, later."
  Seeing the sudden seriousness, she became serious
too. "Bad news, Sire?"
  "No, and yes. I will leave at dawn."
  "For Dragon's Tooth?"
  He hesitated and she wondered if she had
made a mistake in asking, but he was wondering
what to do about her. Earlier, weighing the need for
another forced march, he had decided to leave her and
let her follow as quickly as she could. Now,
looking at her, he did not want her to be away
from him. Her palanquin would hold them back.
She could ride though not well enough and such a journey
would be arduous.
  Either way the plan he had agreed with Akeda
would stay the same: "The first party of forty men,
with a double wearing a set of my light armor,
leaves just before dawn and heads leisurely and
obviously for the North Road. Halfway
to Yedo they will turn back and return here, my
"double" vanished. The second party, mine, with the
men I brought from Yedo, will leave shortly after the
first and head rapidly for the Tokaid@o. Forced
march, under the same captain--I will be disguised as
an ordinary cavalry samurai and will remain so
until I am safely in Yedo Castle."
  "Very dangerous, Sire," General Akeda
said heavily.
  "Yes. You will watch Ogama, and hope. It
is to his advantage I succeed in curbing
Anjo."
  "Yes. But you are an irresistible target
outside, an easy one. Look at what
happened today. Let me go with you."
  "Impossible. Listen, if Ogama
decides to mount his strike he will attack here first
--better expect it. You must repel him whatever
the cost."
  "I will not fail in that, Sire," the old
general said.
  And I will not fail to reach Yedo, Yoshi thought
with equal confidence. As to the attack, it only
reminds me it was not the first and will not be the last.
  He saw Koiko watching him. It is easier
to be balanced when she is near me. The
lamplight was glinting on her lips and in her
eyes, and he saw the curve of her cheekbones and
column of her neck, the raven hair,
the perfect folds of her kimono and
under-kimonos showing slightly from her white skin.
Smooth curves, her posture flawless, and her
two hands held like flowers in her lap of azure
silk.
  She would have to travel light. No maids. And
make do with whatever was available from Inn to Inn.
That would displease her for she likes perfection.
Perhaps she would balk at such inconsiderate and, for
her, unnecessary haste. He remembered the first time
he had suggested that.
  It was not so long ago, just after he had decided
to obtain her exclusivity and had told the
mama-san, Makin, to leave with her for
Dragon's Tooth to make arrangements with his
wife at once--Hosaki had, correctly,
deemed it wise to see the mama-san and Koiko
herself as the financial commitment would be huge.
  Meikin had told him the journey would take
at least a week to plan, Koiko would of course
be taking her own hairdresser and masseuse and
three maids.
  "Ridiculous," he had said impatiently.
"So many staff are not necessary for such a short
journey and an unnecessary expense. You will both
leave at once."
  They had obeyed at once. Without
attendants. It had taken them three days to reach
the first way station outside Yedo, three days for the
second. Angry, he had easily ridden the
same distance from dawn to dusk.
  "Lord Yoshi," Meikin had said, greeting
him lavishly, feigning surprise. "How
pleasant to see you."
  "What is all the delay for?"'
  "Delay, Sire? We were ordered to leave
at once. We are doing exactly as you
ordered."
  "But why are you taking so long?"'
  "So long, Sire? But you did not order us
to make a forced march."
  "You will hurry up," he snapped, noticing
how she belabored "order." "Tell Koiko
I wish to see her."
  The mama-san had bowed and hurried away
to Koiko's quarters, leaving him seething. When,
at length she returned she said happily,
"Koiko-san will be honored to see you, Sire,
instantly Sire, the moment she can arrange a
suitable maid to help her with her
hair. She regrets it would be impertinent to receive
you without the due preparation an honored, revered
person such as you would expect, and adds, humbly,
"please be kind enough to wait, she will be as quick as she
can when the maids arrive ...""
  Sourly he had glared at her, knowing that as much
as he would insist, he would have to wait. His only
recourse was to storm into Koiko's room and lose
total face and destroy any chance that she would ever
be available to him again.
  Who does she think she is? he had wanted
to bellow.
  He had not. He had smiled to himself. When you
purchase a rare sword, you expect it to be
made of the finest steel, with the best cutting edge and a
fire of its own. He nodded coolly. "Send
for her own maids--and hairdresser and masseuse
--from Yedo very quickly indeed. It's your fault they
are not here, you should have told me they were important
to the Lady Koiko. She is correct not to see
me improperly. I will expect this never to happen
again!"
  Meikin had flooded him with apologies and
bowed him away abjectly, and he laughed all the
way back to Yedo having bested them, making them
lose face and giving them both a firm warning:
do not play games with me again.
  Koiko's eyes had never left his face,
watching and waiting. "When you smile, Sire, it
makes me very happy."
  "What am I smiling about?"
  "Me, Sire," she said simply. "I think
because I help you laugh at life, and though
Man's span on earth is but a quick hunt for
shelter before the rains come down, you allow me
to provide, from time to time, a shelter from the rain."
  "Yes you do," he said contentedly. If I
leave her here I won't see her for weeks, and
life is only a cherry blossom exposed to a
vagrant wind that knows no master--my life,
hers, all life. "I do not want to leave you
here."
  "It will be good to be home again."
  In his secret heart, he thought about Meikin.
I have not forgotten she is a shishi informant as your
maid was. Stupid of the mama-san to risk you,
risk me thinking you were also part of those murdering
scum. "Do any of your maids ride,
Koiko?"
  "I do not know, Sire. I imagine
at least one would."
  "If you were to come with me you would have to ride too,
with just one maid, and travel light, a palanquin
would delay me. I can easily arrange for you
to travel leisurely with your household if you
prefer."
  "Thank you but since you would prefer me to be with
you your preference is mine, of course. If I
become a burden, then it is easy for you
to decide. I am honored you asked me."
  "But is there a maid, an acceptable maid who
can also ride? If not then you must follow as soon
as possible," he said, again giving her the
opportunity to decline gracefully without
offense.
  "There is one, Sire," she said on a sudden
impulse, "a new maiko, not quite a maid, but
an apprentice and a little more. Her name is
Sumomo Fujahito, daughter of a Satsuma
goshi, ward of an old friend, a client who was good
to me years ago."
  He listened as she told him about Sumomo, and
was too well versed in the customs of the Floating
World to ask about the other client. Intrigued, he
sent for the girl. "S. Sumomo, your father
disapproves of your future marriage?"
  "Yes Lord."
  "It is unforgivable not to obey your parents."
  "Yes Lord."
  "You will obey them."
  "Yes, Lord." She looked at him
fearlessly. "I have already told them, humbly, that
I will obey but that I will die before I marry any
other man."
  "Your father should have ordered you into a nunnery for such
impertinence."
  After a pause she muttered, "Yes, Lord."
  "Why are you here in Ky@oto and not at home?"
  "I, I was sent here to be retrained by my
guardian."
  "He has done a very poor job, has he
not?"
  "So sorry, Lord." She bowed her head to the
tatami, politely and with grace, but he was
certain not with any penitence. Why do I waste my
time, he thought. Perhaps because I am accustomed
to absolute obedience from everyone, except
Koiko who must be maneuvered like an unstable
boat in a high wind, perhaps because it might be
diverting to curb this young person, to train
her to the fist like the fledgling peregrine she seems
to be, to use her beak and claws for my
purposes, not for her lord of creation Oda.
  "What will you do when this Oda, this Satsuma
goshi, eventually decides to obey his parents as
is his duty, and take another woman to wife?"
  "If he will accept me as a consort, even
without intimacy I will be content. As an occasional
woman, I will be content. The moment he tires of
me or dismisses me, so sorry, that is the day
I will die."
  "You are a stupid young woman."
  "Yes, Lord. Please excuse me, that is
my karma." She dropped her eyes and remained
motionless.
  Amused, he glanced momentarily at Koiko
who waited for him to decide. "Say your liege
lord, Sanjiro, orders you to marry another man
and orders you not to commit seppuku."
  "I am samurai, I will obey without question,"
she said proudly, "as I will obey my guardian
and Oda-sama. But on my way to the wedding feast
there may be a regrettable accident."
  He grunted. "Do you have sisters?"
  She was startled. "Yes, Lord. Three."
  "Are they as stupid and difficult as you are?"
  "They ... no, Sire."
  "Can you ride?"
  "Yes, Sire."
  "Well enough to journey to Yedo?"
  "Yes, Sire."
  "Koiko, are you sure she can please you if
I agree?"
  "I believe so, Sire. I am only
afraid I may fail you with my lack of
skill."
  "You can never fail me, Koiko-chan. So,
Sumomo, you are sure you will be able to please the
Lady Koiko?"
  "Yes, Sire and I will protect her with my
life."
  "Will you also improve your manners, become
less arrogant, more womanly and less like
Domu-Gozen?" This was a famous woman
samurai, mistress to a Sh@ogun, a vicious
killer, who, centuries ago, rode into battle
with her equally violent Sh@ogun lover.
  He saw her eyes widen and she became even
younger. "Oh, I'm not like her, Lord, not at all
--I would give anything to be even a
tiny little bit like the Lady Koiko. Anything."
  He hid his laugh as Sumomo gorged on this
first morsel he had tossed to her. "You may go.
I'll decide later."
  When they were alone again he chuckled. "A
wager, Koiko? A new kimono that Sumomo
will be trained by the time we reach Yedo--if I
decide to bring you both with me."
  "Trained in what way, Sire?"
  "That she will contentedly agree to return to her
parents and obey them and marry without seppuku."
  Koiko shook her head smiling. "So sorry,
whatever the wager I am afraid you would lose,
Sire."
  That she could consider him making an error of
judgment lost some of his good humor. "A kimono
against a favor," Yoshi said sharply not meaning
to be so sharp.
  "I accept," she said at once with a laugh,
"but only on the understanding that with the gift of the
kimono, you accept the favor back from me that you
would have asked."
  His eyes crinkled with admiration with the way she
had twisted his mistake into a pleasantry. It was
a mistake to attempt a wager, any wager.
And a mistake to be confident over the wiles of a
woman--a certain path to disaster.

                 

        SAKONOSHITA VILLAGE

    Saturday, 6th December:
  On the Tokaid@o Road, some forty miles
eastwards from Ky@oto, in the mountains, was the
Sixth way station, the village of
Sakonoshita, and as dusk began to fall, the
last of the travellers and porters, bent against a
raw wind, were hurrying to pass the barrier before it
closed. All were weary and anxious for hot
food, hot sak`e and warmth, even the
half-dozen barrier guards who stamped their
straw-sandaled feet against the cold, checking
identity papers at random. "It'll snow tonight,"
one grumbled, "I hate winter, hate the cold,
hate this posting."
  "You hate everything."
  "Not everything. I like eating and fornicating. In the
next life I want to be born son to an
Osaka moneylending rice merchant.
Then I can eat and drink and fornicate only the
best, and be warm while my father buys me
hirazamurai status, or at least goshi--not just
a stinking pissed-on ashigaru."
  "Dreamer! You'll be reborn a landless
peasant, or a bending toy boy in a tenth-rank
brothel. Close the barrier."
  "It's not dark yet."
  "Let any stragglers freeze or pay the
usual."
  "If the captain hears you, you will find yourself in
the North Island where they say your cock
freezes when you try to piss." The guard looked
down the road that curled away to Ky@oto, now
empty, with a darkening, ominous sky above. A
squall tugged at their straw overmantles.
"Hurry up, oaf," he called out
impatiently at the last man, a half-naked
porter staggering past with his heavy load. He
lowered the first bar, his face chapped by the wind, and
then the second bar, making the barrier firm, and
turned away for shelter and hot soup.
  "Hey, look there!" A phalanx of riders
had trotted into view around the far corner. "Open
the bars!"
  "Let them wait. They're late." The guard
used the back of his hand to clean away a persistent
nose dribble, squinting against the squall. With the
other guards he scanned the riders, thirty or
forty he estimated, too tired to count. No
banners, so unimportant. Travel-stained,
their ponies lathered. They rode in a cluster
around two women. The women rode astride, and
wore heavy clothes and large hats with veils
tied under their chins. He laughed to himself. They'll
never get rooms tonight, nor sleep snug, not with the
village full. Piss on them.
  As they arrived, Captain Abeh in the lead
called out, "Hey there, open up!"
  "I'm coming, I'm coming," the guard growled,
taking his time, and wished he hadn't. Abeh was out
of his saddle in an instant. The blow smashed him
senseless.
  "Get this barrier open!" Abeh said, voice
grating. Two riders had dismounted beside him, one of
them Yoshi, a scarf around his face, the other
Wataki, whom Yoshi had rewarded for helping
to save his life. An officer stormed out of the
guard house, gaping at his prone, unconscious
man. "What's going on? You're under
arrest."
  "Get this barrier open!"
  "You are under arrest."
  Abeh strode around the barrier, no mistaking
the danger. "Open the barrier. Hurry up."
Guards rushed to obey but the officer blustered,
"You will all show identity papers an--"
  "Listen, monkey," Captain Abeh shoved
his face at the officer who froze, "important
guests require important manners and no
delays on a cold night and it is not yet
sundown." With that he bashed him on the side of his
head, the officer reeled, and a second savage
blow collapsed him in a heap. To the stupefied
sentries Abeh rapped, "Tell this fool
to report to me at dawn or I will find him and
use him for sword practice, and the rest of you!"
He waved his party through then mounted and cantered after
them.
  Within minutes he had arranged the best quarters
in the best Inn. Those who had reserved them bowed as
they fled, grateful for the privilege of vacating
them--rich merchants, other samurai, none of
whom were prepared for a fight to the death that would have
surely erupted.
  Yoshi took off his hat and scarf when the shoji
doors were closed. The rotund patron of this, the
Inn of Pleasant Dreams, was on his knees beside
the door, head bowed, waiting for orders. His mind
was ringing with curses that he had not been forewarned about
these late arrivals, cursing them for disrupting his
tranquility as they would surely continue to disrupt
it--whoever they were. He recognized none of them
and found it extraordinary they flew no banners,
wore simple Bakufu uniforms and symbols,
used no names, noticing that even this samurai, now
treated with so much respect in private by the vile
Captain and given his most expensive rooms, was
not addressed by name or rank. And who are the two
women? A daimyo's wife and maid? Or just
two high-class whores? The news of their
arrival had sped around the Inn. At once he
had offered a reward to the maid who discovered their
identity.
  "Your name, landlord?" Yoshi asked.
  "Ichi-jo, Sire." He thought "sire" the
safest title.
  "First a bath, then massage, then food."
  "Instantly, Sire. May I have the honor
of showing you the way myself?"
  "Just a bath maid. I will eat here. Thank
you, you may go."
  The man bowed unctuously, heaved himself to his
feet, and waddled away.
  Captain Abeh confirmed security
arrangements: sentries would surround this
eight-room bungalow. Koiko's rooms were
down the veranda that would be guarded at all times.
Between her quarters and Yoshi's would be a room with
two more guards.
  "Good, Captain. Now get some sleep."
  "Thank you, but I am not tired, sir."
  Yoshi had ordered that he was to be treated as an
ordinary goshi, except in private, when the
only honorific they would use was "sir."
"You will get some sleep. I need you alert.
We've many more days yet." Yoshi saw a
flicker behind the young man's eyes, bloodshot from
fatigue. "Yes?"
  Uneasily Abeh said, "Please excuse
me but if it is urgent for you to reach Yedo, it would
be safer for you to be escorted ahead of the Lady."
  "Get some sleep," Yoshi said. "Tired men
make mistakes. It was also a mistake to crush
the officer. The sentry was enough." Silently he
dismissed him. Abeh bowed and left, cursing himself
for his stupidity in volunteering something so obvious.
Three times they had made unnecessary stops today,
twice yesterday. He checked all the sentries
and stretched out in his room. In moments he was fast
asleep.
  After the bath and massage and food eaten
slowly though he was very hungry, Yoshi strolled
down the corridor. The decision to bring Koiko
had been easy. It had occurred to him that she would
be a perfect decoy and had told Akeda to see
that everyone knew he was just sending her under escort
to Yedo, while he went separately.
  "Perfect," Akeda had said.
  He went into her outer room. It was empty, the
inner shoji closed. "Koiko?" he called out and
settled himself on one of the two cushions. The
shoji slid open. Sumomo was kneeling, holding
it for Koiko, eyes on the tatami, her hair
was up in Ky@oto style, her eyebrows plucked
and a little makeup on her lips. A welcome
improvement, he thought.
  The moment Koiko saw him she knelt and both
women bowed in unison. He noticed that
Sumomo bowed perfectly, a pattern
of Koiko's grace, and this pleased him too, no
sign that the hard riding had affected Sumomo in
any way. He returned the salutation. The beds
of down futons were already made up.
  As Koiko came smiling into this room and
Sumomo closed the shoji behind her, she said,
"So, Tora-chan, how are you?" Her voice was
sweet as usual, her coiffure perfect as
usual, but, as never before, the same kimono as the
previous night.
  Uneasily he noticed a flicker of
discomfort as she settled herself. "The riding is
too much for you?"
  "Oh no, the first few days are bound to be a
little difficult but soon I will be as tough as ..."
Her eyes were merry. "As tough as
Domu-Gozen."
  He smiled, but knew he had made an error
of judgment. Yesterday three way stations were
covered, the same today, but on neither day had he
made the distance he wanted. The riding was
exhausting her. I made a mistake I should not
have made. She will never complain and will go beyond her
limit, may even do herself harm.
  Do I need to hurry? Yes. Will she be safe
in a palanquin with a ten-man escort? Yes.
Would it be wise to reduce my bodyguard by that
many? No. I could send for more men from Yedo tonight but
that would cost me five or six days. My instinct
tells me to hurry, the gai-jin are
unpredictable, so is Anjo, so is Ogama--
did he not threaten: "If you don't deal with
them, I will."
  "Koiko-chan. Let us go to bed. Tomorrow is
tomorrow."

  In the night Sumomo lay on warm futons
and under coverlets in their outer room, one arm under
her head, sleepy but not tired, and tranquil.
From the inner room she could hear Yoshi's regular
breathing, Koiko's hardly perceptible.
Outside were night sounds. A dog barking somewhere,
night insects, wind in the foliage, occasionally
a guard muttering to another, pots and pans
clattering from the early kitchen detail.
  Her first sleep had been fine. The two days
of exercise and vigorous massage and freedom
had made her feel vibrant. And, too, the
compliments from Koiko about the way she had arranged
her hair tonight as Teko had taught her
--and how to add color to her lips--had also
pleased her.
  Everything was succeeding better than she had
dreamed. Her immediate objective had been
achieved. She had been accepted. They were on the
way to Yedo. To Hiraga. She was an innermost
part of the Yoshi's entourage, poised.
Katsumata had said, "Do not be impetuous.
Under no circumstance put yourself at risk unless
there is a chance of escape. Close to him you are
of enormous value, do not ruin that or involve
Koiko."
  "She will not know about me?"'
  "Only what I told her, the same that you
know."
  "Then she is already involved, no? So
sorry, I mean, because of her Yoshi may accept
me."
  "He will make that decision, not her. No,
Sumomo, she is not your accomplice. If she
was to discover your real connection, particularly about
Hiraga, and your possible purpose, she would
stop it--she would have to stop it."
  "Possible purpose? Please, what is my
prime duty?"'
  "To be ready. Better a waiting sword
than a corpse."
  I have no sword, she thought. Perhaps I could
grab one from a guard if I could surprise him.
I have three shuriken, poison-tipped, hidden in
my bundle beside me, and of course my obi knife
always on my person. More than enough, with
surprise. Eeee, life is very strange.
Strange that I should prefer being on my own with my
own mission--so alien to our normal way of
life, always being part of a unit, thinking as one,
agreeing as one in our culture of consensus. I
enjoyed being with the unit of shishi and yet.
  And yet to be honest--"Always be honest to yourself,
Sumomo-chan," her father had said, over and over,
"that is your way to the future, for a leader."
To be honest I found it difficult to curb my
urge to lead them, even shishi, and to bend them to the
correct path and thinking.
  Is that my karma, to lead? Or is it to die
unfulfilled because it is truly stupid for a
woman to wish to be a leader in the world of
Nippon. Strange to want the impossible. Why
am I like that, not like other women? Is it because father
had no sons and treated us, his
daughters, as sons, telling us to be strong and
to stand up and never to be afraid, even allowing me,
over Mother's advice, to follow Hiraga and his
equally impossible star ...
  She sat up in the futons a moment, tousling
her hair to try to clear her head and prevent her
mind from so many new and untrammeled thoughts, then
lay back again. But sleep would not arrive, only
permutations of Hiraga and Koiko and Yoshi and
Katsumata, and her.
  Strange about Yoshi: "We must kill him
and the Sh@ogun," Katsumata has said, over the
years, so many times, and Hiraga, "not for themselves
but because of what they represent. Power will never
return to the Emperor while they remain alive.
So they must go, chiefly Yoshi--he is the glue
that binds the Sh@ogunate. Sonno-joi is our
beacon, any sacrifice must be made to achieve
it!"
  A pity to kill Lord Toranaga. Another
pity that he is a good man and not vile, not vile
like Anjo, not that I have ever seen him. Perhaps
Anjo is also a kind man and everything said about him
merely lies of jealous fools.
  In this short time I have seen Yoshi for what he
is: Dynamic, kind, strong, wise and
impassioned. And Koiko? How wonderful she
is, though how sad, so sad to be so doomed.
  Remember what she said: "The curse of our
World is that as much as you bind and train yourself with all
manner of defenses and resolves to treat a
client as just a client, from time to time one appears
who turns your head into jelly, your resolve
into froth and your loins into a fireball. When it
happens it is frighteningly gloriously terrible.
You are lost, Sumomo. If the gods favor
you, you die together. Or you die when he leaves,
or you allow yourself to stay alive but you are dead
even so."
  "I'm not going to allow that to happen when I'm
grown," Teko had piped up, overhearing them.
"Not me. Have you been turned to jelly,
Mistress?"'
  Koiko had laughed. "Many times, child, and you have
forgotten one of your most important lessons:
to close your ears when others are talking. Off
to bed with you."
  Has Koiko's head really been turned
to jelly? Yes.
  As a woman I know she considers
Lord Yoshi more than a client, however much she
tries to hide it. Where will it end? Sadly, so very
sad. He will never make her consort.
  And me? Will it be the same with me? Yes I
think so--what I told Lord Yoshi was the truth:
I will have no other husband but Hiraga. "It's the
truth ..." she muttered aloud and that brought herself
out of the downward spiral. "Stop it," she
murmured, following the method of her childhood,
of her mother crooning: "Think only good thoughts,
little one, for this is the World of Tears soon enough,
think bad thoughts and in a blink of the eye you are in
the black pit of despair. Think good thoughts
..."
  She made the effort and turned her mind: only
Hiraga makes life worthwhile.
  A shiver went through her body as a new concept
sprang at her with a shocking strength of reality:
Foolish this sonno-joi! It is just a
slogan. As if it will change anything. A few
leaders will change, that is all. Will the new ones
be any better? No, except yes if
Hiraga is one, perhaps yes if Katsumata
is one but, ah, so sorry, they will not live that
long.
  Then why follow them?
  A tear slid down her cheek. Because Hiraga
turns my head to jelly, my loins ...

  In the dawn Yoshi slid out of bed and padded
through to the outer room, his sleeping yukata tucked
up, breath visible in the cold air. Koiko
stirred, saw that he was all right, and dozed off
again. In the outer room Sumomo's futons and
bedclothes were already packed away in the side
cupboard, the low table already set for their
breakfast, their two cushions neatly in place.
  Outside the cold was sharper. He stepped
into straw sandals and went along the veranda to the
outhouse, nodded to the waiting manservant and chose
an unoccupied bucket in the line of buckets and
began to relieve himself. His flow was strong and that
pleased him. Other men stood beside him. He paid
no attention to them, or they to him. Idly he
directed the stream at the swarming, ever present
flies not expecting to drown one of them.
  When he had finished he moved to the other part and
squatted over a vacant hole in the bench, men
and some women either side, Sumomo one of them. In
his mind he was alone, his ears and eyes
and nostrils shut tight against their presence as theirs
were against everyone else.
  This imperative ability was painstakingly
cultivated from infancy: "You must work at this like
nothing else, little one, you must, or your life will be
unbearable" was drummed into him, as it was every child.
"Here where we live cheek by cheek, children and
parents and grandparents and maids and more in each tiny
house, where all walls are made of paper,
privacy has to be cultivated in your head and can
only exist there, your own and also as the essential
politeness to others. Only this way can you be
tranquil, only this way can you be civilized,
only this way can you remain sane."
  Absently, he waved at the flies. Once
when he was young he had lost his temper at two or
three that were plaguing him and had tried to smash them
to pieces. It had earned him an immediate smack
around the face, his cheeks burning with hurt, but more
with shame that he had caused his mother grief, and her
need to administer the punishment.
  "So sorry, my son," she said softly.
"Flies are like sunrise and sunset,
inevitable, except they can be a torment--if you
allow them to be. You must learn to dismiss them. Every
day, for part of each day for as many days as necessary,
please, stand there and let them crawl on your face
and hands without moving. Until they become nothing.
Flies must become nothing--use your will, that is
what you are given it for. They must become nothing
to you, then they'll not cause you to ruin your harmony
or, worse, ruin the harmony of others ..."
  Now, sitting there, he felt the odd fly on
his back and face. They did not offend him.
  Quickly he was done. The rice paper was of good
quality. Feeling very alive and well, he held
out his hands for the servant to pour water over them.
When his hands were clean, he doused water from another
container onto his face, shivered, accepted a
small towel and dried himself, stepped back on
to the veranda and consciously opened his senses.
  Around him the Inn was stirring, the few ponies
being saddled and groomed, men, women, children,
porters already eating and chatting noisily, or
leaving for the next stage of their journey, to or from
Ky@oto. In the common area near the entrance
gate, Abeh was checking men and equipment. When
he saw Yoshi he joined him.
  Because people were about he did not bow, finding that very
hard. His uniform was smart and he was
refreshed. "Good morning." He just managed
to bite back the "sir." "We are ready
to leave whenever it pleases you."
  "After breakfast. Arrange a palanquin for
Lady Koiko."
  "At once. For ponies, or porters?"
  "Ponies." Yoshi strolled back to his
quarters and told Koiko she would not be riding
today, that he would see how much progress they made
and then, tonight, he would decide. Sumomo would
ride as usual.
  By evening they barely made two stations.

             HAMAMATSU

  Yoshi chose the Inn of the Cranes for the night,
neither the best nor the worst in village,
Hamamatsu--a pleasing collection of houses and
Inns straddling the Tokaid@o, renowned for its
sak`e, where the road curled down towards the
sea.
  After eating alone as usual, Yoshi went
to join Koiko--if they ate together invariably,
by custom, she would take almost nothing having
intentionally eaten beforehand so she could concentrate on
his needs. Tonight it was his pleasure to play a game
of Go. This was a complex game of strategy,
played with counters and similar to draughts.
  Both of them were good players, but Koiko was a
virtuoso, so much so that she could, almost always, win
or lose at whim. This made the game doubly
difficult for her. He had ordered her never
to lose deliberately, but he himself was a bad
loser. If she won on a wrong day he would
sulk. A win for him on one of his bad days would
get him out of any ill humor.
  Tonight he won. Narrowly. "Oh, Sire,
you've destroyed me!" she said. "And I thought I
had you beaten!" They were in her inner room, sitting
with their legs in the small pit under the low table with a
tiny charcoal brazier in it, and a thick padded
cloth over the table tucked around them to keep
drafts out and the heat in. "Are you warm enough?"
  "Yes, thank you, Koiko. How are your
aches and pains?"
  "Oh, I have none. The masseuse was very good
tonight." She called out, "Sumomo, sak`e and
tea please."
  In the outer room Sumomo fetched the flask
and teapot from another brazier, opened the
shoji, and brought them in. She served both well
and Koiko nodded with satisfaction.
  He said, "Have you learned the tea ceremony,
Sumomo?"
  "Yes, Sire," Sumomo said, "but, but I
am afraid I am sadly lacking in skill."
  "Lord Yoshi is a master," Koiko said and
sipped the sak`e, glad for it. Her rump and
back ached from the day's jolting in the palanquin,
her thighs from the two days of riding, and her head from
the effort of losing while appearing to covet
victory. All of which she hid, and the fact that her
spirits were down over the lack of progress today.
Clearly this had disappointed him. But then, she
thought, we both knew another forced march was not
possible. He must go on and I will follow. It will
be good to be without him for a while. This life is
wearing, however wonderful he is.
  They drank peacefully. Then he said, "Tomorrow,
early, I will go on with thirty men leaving ten with
you, Abeh in charge. You will follow me to Yedo
leisurely."
  "Of course. With your permission, may I
follow as quickly as possible?"
  He smiled. "That would please me, but only as
long as you arrived not aching, either in body or in
spirit."
  "Even if I was, your smile would instantly
cure me. Another game?"
  "Yes, but not Go!"
  She laughed. "Then I must make some
preparations." She got up and went to the outer
room, closing the shoji after her. He heard her
talking to Sumomo but paid them no attention, his
mind occupied with tomorrow, Yedo and gai-jin.
  Their voices died away as they went out. He
finished his sak`e, enjoying it, then walked into the
innermost room where the futons and padded
coverlets were spread over impeccable tatami.
Winter landscapes and colors were the dominant
decorations. He took off his padded yukata,
shivered, and slipped under the eiderdown.
  When Koiko returned he heard her pottering
in the outer room, then she came in and she went
straight to the bathroom where there were containers for the
night, should they be needed, jugs of water to drink,
and others for washing. "I sent Sumomo to sleep
in another room tonight," she called out to him, "and
asked Abeh to post a guard outside with orders
not to disturb you till dawn."
  "Why did you do that?"
  She came back into the room. "This is our
last night for a time--I mentioned to him I would not be
travelling with you tomorrow--and I wanted you totally
to myself." Leisurely she stepped out of her
kimono and snuggled beside him.
  Though he had seen her naked many times, and
felt her touch many times, and slept with her many
times, tonight was many times better than it had ever
been.

               KY@OTO

  In the palace in Ky@oto, one of the Lord
Chancellor's spies knocked on his bedroom
door, waking him, and handed him the carrier pigeon
message container. "This has just been intercepted,
Lord."
  The tiny cylinder was addressed to Chief
Bakufu Palace Advisor, Saito and
bore the personal seal of Tair@o Nori
Anjo. He hesitated, then broke the seal with a
manicured nail.
  Anjo had sent the message at dawn:

The gai-jin leader has insolently rejected
the Imperial command to leave Yokohama and they are
preparing to invade us. Draft the Order for
National Mobilization for the Emperor's
signature which, with this document, I formally
request the Emperor to sign at once. Then
send copies urgently to all daimyos. Make
arrangements for Sh@ogun Nobusada to return
to Yedo at once to head our forces, the Princess
Yazu can, preferably should, stay in Ky@oto.
Lord Yoshi is formally required to return
at once.

  The Lord Chancellor thought a while, smugly
decided Saito would be overruled and the Emperor
advised never to sign a mobilization order. With
great care he replaced the message and resealed
the tube with his secret duplicate seal.
  "Put it back, make sure it is
delivered," he said and when alone, he chuckled.
War! Good. Anjo was the perfect choice for
tair@o. They will all drown in their own urine,
along with all gai-jin, and Yoshi, all of them.
  Except the Princess. She will stay,
to become a widow--the sooner the
better.

                 

        HAMAMATSU VILLAGE

    Monday, 8th December:
  Sumomo awoke well before first light. Her
dreams had been bad. She was no longer on the
Tokaid@o with Koiko and Lord Yoshi but back
in Ky@oto, chased by Bakufu soldiers led
by Abeh into the trap of the burning shishi house,
screams everywhere, blood everywhere, guns firing,
in panic squeezing down into the narrow tunnel after
Takeda and Katsumata, the hole barely big
enough, crawling after them, the sides encroaching,
scraping her and becoming narrower. Not enough air
to breathe, filled with dust. Takeda's feet ahead
as he wriggled onward gasping, someone or something
just behind her, then Takeda becoming Yoshi kicking
at her, stopping her then vanishing--with nothing up
ahead but an earth coffin.
  When her heart slowed and eyes could focus in the
shaded light of the oil flame, she saw one of the
guards watching her from his futons next to hers.
Last night she had accompanied Koiko to talk
to Abeh and he had told her to sleep in this
communal room, plenty of space for her to one
side--a perfectly satisfactory
arrangement. Four guards were using it, two
sleeping and two on duty. There she had made a
bed, not easily to sleep, her mind in turmoil
for she had overheard Yoshi telling Koiko they
would not travel onward with him, and overheard
Koiko saying to Abeh, "Lord Yoshi has
decided from tomorrow I, and my party, will follow
leisurely."
  "What arrangements does he want made,
Lady?"'
  "I believe he said he wants to leave you and
ten men to guide me to Yedo, so sorry to be a
problem."
  "It is no problem for me, Lady, so long
as he is safe."
  Safe, and out of reach, Sumomo had thought,
dismayed by the change in plan. So much could go wrong
between now and Yedo.
  Eventually she had slept. To dream.
Normally she did not dream. Last thing at night
and in the morning she would always say a
prayer, Namu Amida Butsu, just the name
of the Buddha Amida, which was enough if there was a god
to pray to. Last night she had forgotten. Now,
silently she said the words, and closed her eyes.
  In moments she was again in the shishi hut.
  That had been the worst experience of her life,
the attack without warning, gunfire through the walls
and in the same instant the head of the youth beside her
exploded, no time for the lad even to shout but others
did, partly in panic, partly in agony as random
bullets poured at them, Katsumata paralyzed
for a moment, then directing the defense, ordering some
to charge out the front others the back. Both
charges driven back, she not knowing where to hide,
knowing all was lost, fire beginning and more screams and
more blood and this the end, Namu Amida
Butsu, Namu Amida Butsu, then hands
grabbing her roughly, shoving her down into the hole
after the escaping Takeda--who, raving, had dragged
another man out of the way, as Katsumata had
torn someone else away--as her savior shishi,
whose face she never saw, was murdered in his turn
and a fight ensued that blocked the escape until it
was too late.
  Somehow out of that hate-filled darkness into the open
air. Fleeing, their panic run going on and on
until, chests bursting, Katsumata lead them
tortuously to his haven of last resort.
Iwakura's back door.
  Immediately a council of war with the shishi there.
"I suggest we scatter for the time being,"
Katsumata had said. "We'll regroup and
meet in the spring, third or fourth month. In the
spring we will start a new offensive."
  "Why wait?"' someone asked.
  "Because we're betrayed, because there's a spy in
our midst, or amongst our patrons. We are
betrayed. We must conserve and scatter."
  And so they had. "Sumomo, you'll go
to Koiko ..."
  But before that her disorientation had been vast,
unaccountable tears, rushing heart beat, too
easily in panic. "It will pass,
Sumomo," Katsumata had said.
  Again he had been right. He had given her a
draft that had made her sleep, and calmed her.
By the time she saw Koiko she was like before, almost but
not quite. "When you feel the fear returning, just
take a little sip of the medicine," he had said.
"In a week or two you will be
perfect again. Always remember, sonno-joi
needs you perfect ..."
  She came out of her reverie, sweating again, the
fear coming on again. It was still night. Her fingers
reached for her bundle beside her head that held the
small bottle. But the bundle was not there. She
had not brought it with her when she had changed rooms.
Never mind, she thought, I do not need it, I can do
without it.
  She repeated that several times, twisting in her
bed, the quilts damp and clammy around her. Then
she noticed the guard still watching her.
  "Bad dreams, neh?" he whispered, his
voice kind.
  She nodded silently.
  "I could give you good dreams." He moved his
quilt aside, invitingly. She shook her head.
He shrugged and turned over and forgot her,
considering her stupid to reject such pleasure. Not
offended she turned her back too, just a little
amused. Her hand moved to her obi knife in its
sheath at her waist. Its touch gave her the peace
she needed. A last Namu Amida
Butsu.
  She closed her eyes and slept without dreams.

  Koiko was pleasantly awake. It was not quite
dawn. Yoshi slept peacefully beside her. It was
nice to lie there, drifting, knowing she would not have
to endure another day's discomfort in a palanquin,
being bumped from side to side, because of unseemly
haste. And also because her night had been
tranquil. Yoshi had slept solidly.
Occasionally a small snoring snuffle would tweak
him but that did not disturb her. "Train your ears,
Ladies," the retired courtesan would cackle
toothlessly and endlessly to all maiko in the
school, "your working life will be spent with old
men. All men snore, but old men really
snore, but old men really pay--the young ones
take your flowers and snore anyway."
  Of all the men she had slept with, Yoshi was the
most serene while asleep. Awake he was the
most difficult. To stay ahead of. To satisfy.
Not physically. Physically he was strong and
practiced and as much as she was trained to be
uninvolved within an embrace, he would guide her
so she too, most evenings, would gain the sheen of
pleasure.
  Katsumata was more of a magician.
He caressed her imagination and thoughts, stimulating
her beyond anything she could have imagined. He was
delighted when she mastered a new skill--like
training her ears to hear underspoken words: "That is
where the golden knowledge is, the important parts,
signs of danger, of safety, of what is within the
secret heart within the secret heart.
Remember, all of us here, men and women, have
three hearts, one for all the world to see, one for
their family, and one for themselves alone. Certain men
have six hearts. Yoshi is one of these. He is
your goal, the one for whom you must be the foil."
  She chuckled to herself, remembering how she had
said that Lord Yoshi was completely beyond reach and
Katsumata had smiled that smile of his and told
her to be patient, "You have time enough. You are
eighteen, there is not much more I can teach you. You must
begin to expand yourself. Like every serious student, follow
the most important law for all students:
repay your teacher by making it your duty to surpass
him! Be patient, Koiko, at the correct time
your mama-san and I will ensure the Lord Yoshi
becomes aware of you ..."
  And they had. Within the year. The first invitation to the
castle six months and five days ago. Racing
heart and fearful she would fail, but not really. She
was prepared and had done her duty to her teacher.
  But am I guide enough for Yoshi? I know he
enjoys me and my company and my mind. Where should
I guide him? Katsumata never said, just told
me that that will become clear. "Sonno-joi
sums it up. Bind Lord Yoshi to you. Help him
change. Gradually you will help him move even more
to our side. Never forget, he is not enemy, on
the contrary, he is vital to us, he will head the
new Bakufu of loyal samurai, as tair@o
--there will no longer be any need for a Sh@ogun or
Sh@ogunate--with our new and permanent Council
of Samurai helping him ..."
  I wonder what it will be like in the new era, if
I will live to see it, she thought, lying there
comfortably. Now, what about Sumomo?
  It had been completely unnecessary to send her
to another room--as if it mattered that she was next
door, she would not be listening to their cries or
thrashing about. That was not the reason. When Yoshi
told Koiko quietly she would not be going on with
him, she thought she had heard movements in the outer
room, as though Sumomo had shifted closer and was
actually trying to overhear what they were
saying--an astonishing invasion of privacy, and
bad manners.
  Only a nasty busybody would do such a thing,
she had thought. Or a spy. Ah! Is
Katsumata dispassionately playing one of his
intricate games within games, using me to wheedle
a spy in to watch my Tora-chan and me? I will
deal with her tomorrow, meanwhile she can sleep
elsewhere.
  When this had been arranged, telling Sumomo
only that Lord Yoshi preferred to be alone, she
came back and quickly searched Sumomo's
bundle, not knowing why, for she was not certain the
girl had actually tried to spy on them.
  There was nothing unusual in there. A few
clothes, a bottle of some kind of medicine,
nothing else. The neatly folded day kimono was
ordinary and merited only a cursory glance.
Relieved, she had retied the bundle. As to the
bottle ... surely it could not be some kind of
poison?
  Before rejoining Yoshi she had resolved to make
sure that it wasn't. Sumomo would take some.
Never wrong to provide against a potential
danger. Yoshi had said, "That's what killed
Utani. He did not post proper sentries."
  So sorry, what killed Utani was the news
of the tryst whispered to my maid from the samurai
barracks that I allowed her to pass on,
to Meikin who told Hiraga. I wonder how
Hiraga is? As a client, the two times he was
a client when I was sixteen, he was no better
or worse than the faceless others, but as a
shishi, the best. Curious ...
  Yoshi snuffled in his sleep but did not
awaken. Her hand touched him lightly,
encompassed by his warmth. Sleep, my dear
one, you please me more than I dare tell myself,
she thought, then continued thinking about the past.
  Curious that I remember only two faces
amongst all the others: just Katsumata and
Hiraga. Curious that I was groomed to be Lord
Toranaga Yoshi's Lady--for a time. How
fortunate I am. A year, perhaps two, no more
than three and then I will marry. Tora-chan will
choose him for me. Whoever he is he will be
samurai. Eeee, how many sons shall I have? The
old woman soothsayer said three sons and two
daughters, the Chinese monk two sons and two
daughters.
  She smiled to herself. Oh I shall be so wise
ruling my husband's household and so good to my
sons and so strict with my daughters but, never
mind, they will marry well.

  She awoke a few seconds before Yoshi.
He was up instantly, one moment asleep, the
next completely ready for the day. She held his
padded yukata for him, then clasping her kimono
tightly around her, she opened the shoji door, then
the other one, knelt and helped him into straw
slippers. The guard began to bow, caught himself in
time and watched all around again as Yoshi padded off
to the outhouse area.
  Sumomo was kneeling near the door, waiting
patiently, a maid beside her with a brazier and hot
tea and breakfast trays. "Good morning,
Mistress. It's cold this morning, may I
make you tea?"
  "Yes, yes please, Sumomo, quick as a
wink. Close the door, it is chilly."
Koiko hurried back to her inner rooms,
calling out, "We will leave midmorning,
Sumomo. We can change into travelling clothes
then."
  "Yes, Mistress." Sumomo was still standing at
the outer doorway trying to contain her shock. She
had seen at once that her bundle had been
moved, the knot tying the square of silk holding
it together not exactly as she did it. Her day
kimono was still folded nearby but it too had been
moved.
  Hardly breathing, she waited until the maid
left, then unfolded the kimono. When her fingers
felt the hidden shuriken in the secret sleeve
pocket her heart started again.
  But wait, she thought, blood rushing into her
face, just because they're still there does not mean that
someone hasn't discovered them. Do not panic!
Think! Who would search my bundle here and why?
A thief? Never! Abeh? A guard? Koiko?
Yoshi? If one of them, logically I would already
be dead or at least roped and answering questions and
...
  "Sumomo, is the tea ready yet?"
  "Yes, I'm coming, Mistress ..."
  Quickly, and because of the cold, she put the kimono
on over her sleeping yukata--she had already done
her early first wash and brushed her teeth and her
hair that was still in a conventional braid--
tied her obi and replaced her sheathed knife,
all the time her mind working at full speed: Was it
one of them? Perhaps the searcher wasn't careful.
He could have missed them, easy if not expecting
them. Perhaps the searcher wasn't practiced?
Koiko? Why should she search my possessions
now? Of course that had been done by the other maids
when she had first arrived in Koiko's quarters--the
shuriken had been on her person.
  As her mind raced she set the rice gruel
to keep warm, made the tea and took a cup into the
bathroom where Koiko had finishing bathing herself from
the buckets of hot water made fragrant with
extract of flowers. The water was delivered at
dawn through a small trapdoor so that none would be
spilled on the tatamis, and the guests not
disturbed. Night containers were removed in the same
way.
  "I'll wear my brown kimono with the carp,"
Koiko said, sipping gratefully, the cold
crinkling her skin however much she willed herself
to pretend the cold did not exist, "and the
golden-colored obi."
  Sumomo hurried to obey, heart still grinding,
fetched the garments, helping her to dress.
  When the obi was tied to her satisfaction,
Koiko knelt on one of the futons. Sumomo
knelt behind her to brush her lustrous, waist-long
hair. "That's good, Sumomo, you're learning, but
please make the strokes longer and smoother."
  Outside the tempo of the awakening Inn was
increasing. Maids and soldiers and people calling to one
another, Abeh's voice and then Yoshi's. The
two women listened but could not distinguish what was being
said. The voices moved away.
  "Twenty more strokes and then I will eat and have
another cup of tea. Are you hungry?"
  "No, Mistress, thank you, I have already
eaten."
  "You did not sleep well?" Koiko said,
noticing a nervousness about her.
  "No, Lady Koiko. So sorry to tell you
my problem, but sometimes I have difficulty
sleeping, then when I do sleep I have bad
dreams," Sumomo said ingenuously, still
distracted. "The doctor gave me some medicine
to calm me. I forgot to take it with me last
night when I changed rooms."
  "Ah, is that so?" Koiko hid her relief.
"Perhaps you should take some now."
  "Oh but that can wait an--"
  "Please, I insist. It's important you
should be calm."
  Obediently, and gratefully, Sumomo found
the bottle. It had not been tampered with. She
took a sip and re-corked it. The inner warmth
began almost at once. "Thank you, Mistress,"
she said, then continued brushing.
  After the hot rice gruel and pickles, some
cold roasted eel with a sweet sour sauce, and
rice cakes, Koiko said, "Please sit
down, Sumomo, and pour yourself some tea."
  "Thank you, Mistress."
  "Lord Yoshi has decided I am not
to accompany him anymore but to follow,
by palanquin, at a more moderate pace."
  "Some of the guards mentioned that while I was
waiting for you. Everything will be ready whenever you wish
to start."
  "Good." Now that Koiko had discovered the truth
about the bottle she was much more at ease but it had not
changed her decision to be prudent--her duty
to Katsumata already done. "You are safely out of
Ky@oto now," she said softly and Sumomo's
stomach twisted. But for the elixir she would have
panicked. "It is time to part, Sumomo. Today.
Do you have money?"
  "No, Mistress," Sumomo wanted to sound
matter of fact. "But would it be poss--"
  "No need for you to worry, I can give you
some." Koiko smiled, misunderstanding the fluster, and
continued firmly, "Your papers, are they in
order?"
  "Yes, but may I st--"
  "It is best for both of us. I have considered every
possibility. It is best if I travel on
alone. You may stay here or return to your home
in Satsuma--I would advise that--or make your
own way to Yedo."
  "But please may I stay with you?"
  "It is wise if you go your own way now--of
course you realize it was an extreme favor
to your guardian that I accepted you. Now you are
safe," she said kindly.
  "But ... but what will you do, you have no maid. I
want to serve you an--"
  "Yes, and you have been very good, but I can easily
hire someone. Please do not worry about that. Now,
will you go back to Ky@oto?" When Sumomo did
not answer, just stared numbly, she said
gently, "What did your guardian say you were
to do, when you left me?"
  "He, he did not say."
  Koiko frowned. "But surely you must have a
plan."
  "Oh yes, Mistress," Sumomo said,
rattled--even more flustered--her mouth running
away with her, "he told me I was to stay with you
until Yedo. Then, then if it was your pleasure,
I was to leave."
  "To go where?"
  "To, to go to Oda-sama."
  "Yes, of course, but where in Yedo?"
  "I am not sure. May I pour you s--"
  "You are not sure, Sumomo?" Koiko's
frown deepened. "Do you have another family to go
to if he isn't?"
  "Well, yes, there's an Inn, they will know where
he is or there will be a message for me but I
swear I will not be a burden during the journey, not
at all, you teach me so much ..."
  The more Koiko listened as the girl rushed on--
foolishly, she thought, for obviously I've
made up her mind--the less she liked what she
was hearing, or Sumomo's agitation, the way she
spoke and dropped her eyes.
  She closed her ears to the reasons and used the
time to gather her own thoughts. They became more
ominous. "Your guardian, will he be in Yedo
too?"
  "I do not know, so sorry. Please, let me
pour you som--"
  "This Oda-sama is Satsuma--is he part
of the Satsuma garrison?"
  "No." Sumomo cursed herself, she should have
said, I don't know. "The Sats--"
  "Then what is he doing in Yedo?"
  "I do not know, Lady," Sumomo said
lamely, her mind not fast enough, more dismayed every
moment, "I have not seen him for almost a year, that is
... I was told he would be at Yedo."
  Koiko's eyes bored into her. Her voice
became edged. "Your guardian said this Oda-sama
was shishi so he ..." Her voice trailed off
as, saying the word aloud, the enormity of what she
had done, and risked, by agreeing to have this girl with
her, inundated her. "Shishi believe Lord
Yoshi is their prime enemy," she moaned, "if
he's enemy th--"
  "No, Lady, he is not, not him,
only the Sh@ogunate, the Bakufu are enemy,
he is above all that, he is not enemy,"
Sumomo said vehemently, the lie coming easily,
then added before she could stop herself, "Katsum--my
guardian impressed that on all of us."
  "All of you?" Koiko's face went chalky.
"Namu Amida Butsu! You're one of his
acolytes!" Katsumata had told her that a
few, select young women were being trained by him to be
members of his warrior band. "He, he trained you
too?"
  "I am just a humble loyalist, Lady,"
Sumomo said, fighting for control, and to keep her
face guileless.
  Koiko looked around in disbelief, her mind
almost stopped, the blissful world she had been
inhabiting fallen apart. "You are one of them, you
are!"
  Sumomo stared back at her, not knowing how
to extricate herself from the pit that had suddenly
opened in front of them. "Lady, please, let
us think clearly. I, I am no threat to you,
nor you to me, let us leave it like that. I swore
to protect you and I will, and Lord Yoshi if need
be. Let me travel with you. I swear I will
leave the moment we reach Yedo. Please?" Her
eyes willed Koiko to agree. "You will never
regret the kindness. Please. My guardian
asked a lifetime favor. Please, I will serve
you ..."
  Koiko hardly heard the words. She watched
her as a mouse would a poised cobra, no thought in
her head but how to escape, how to make all this a
dream. Is it a dream? Be sensible, your life
is in the balance, more than your life, you must
collect your wits.
  "Give me your knife."
  Sumomo did not hesitate. Her hand went
into her obi and she gave her the sheathed knife.
Koiko took the blade as if it were on fire.
Not knowing what else to do with it, never having handled
or owned or needed one before, all weapons forbidden
in the Floating World, she thrust it into her own
obi. "What do you want with us? Why are you here?"
her voice barely audible.
  "Just to travel with you, Lady," Sumomo said
as though to a child, not realizing her own face was stark.
"Just to travel with you, there is no other reason."
  "Were you part of the assassins, the attackers
on Sh@ogun Nobusada?"
  "Of course not, I am only a simple
loyalist, a frien--"
  "But you were the spy who whispered that my Lord was
going outside the barracks to meet Ogama--it was
you!"
  "No, Lady, I swear it. I have told you
he is not the enemy, that was a lone madman, not one
of ours, I keep say--"
  "You have to leave, you must," Koiko said in a
tiny voice. "Please go. Please go now,
please. Quickly."
  "There is no need to worry or be afraid.
None."
  "Oh, but I am, I am terrified, and
terrified that someone should, should denounce you, Yoshi
would ..." The words seemed to suspend themselves in the
air between them. Their eyes locked, Sumomo
willing her, Koiko helpless and wilting under their
strength. Both seemed to have aged, Koiko torn
apart that she could have been so naive and that her idol
had used her so evilly, Sumomo furious that
she was so stupid not to have agreed instantly the moment
this meddlesome whore had proposed she should leave.
Fool, fool, both were thinking. "I will do as you
say," Sumomo muttered, "I will leave even
though ..."
  The shoji opened. Yoshi strode in
jauntily, heading for the inner room. Their trance
shattered. They hastily bowed. He stopped in
midstride, all his senses shrieking danger.
  "What is it?" he asked sharply. He had
noticed their instant of fear before their heads bowed.
  "Noth ... nothing, Sire," Koiko said,
collecting herself as Sumomo hurried for the
brazier to fetch fresh tea. "You will have tea,
breakfast perhaps?"
  His eyes went from woman to woman.
"What-is-it?" he said slowly, the words like ice
needles.
  Sumomo knelt humbly, "We, we were so
sorry not to be going with you, Sire, it was just that, just
that the Lady Koiko was so sad. May I serve
tea, Sire?"
  The silence gathered. His fists bunched on his
hips, face set, bare legs planted.
"Koiko! Tell-me-now!"
  Koiko's mouth began to move but the words would not
come out. Sumomo's heart stopped, then thundered in
her ears as Koiko dragged herself to her feet,
tears beginning and she stammered, "You
see, she ... it is true but she is not quite what
..."
  Instantly Sumomo was on her feet, her right
hand darting into her sleeve and bringing out a shuriken.
Yoshi set his teeth, seeing it. Her arm curled
back for the throw--he was unarmed, an open target,
his swords in the inner room. At once he
ducked left, hoping the feint would confuse her,
preparing to hurl himself at her, his eyes fixed on
her hand. Unperturbed, she aimed for his chest and
threw viciously.
  The barbed circle of steel spun across the
room. Frantically he arched his body and skewed
around. One of the barbs caught the edge of his
kimono and sliced through the material but touched no
flesh and went on to disappear through the shoji and
thwackked into one of the posts in the inner room as,
jerked off balance by the supreme effort, he
slammed into a wall and buckled into a heap.
  For an instant everything seemed a slow dream
...
  Sumomo reaching endlessly in her sleeve for the
next shuriken, seeing only the great enemy lying
helpless and his dimwitted whore who had caused this
unnecessary conclusion gaping at her, a pillar of fear
--but feeling no fear herself, only elation, sure
that this was her zenith, the moment she had been born
for and had trained all her life for, and that now,
invincible champion of the shishi, she would conquer and,
dying, live in legend forever ...
  Koiko, standing paralyzed, aghast that she had
been duped by the godlike guru who had betrayed
her, told her nothing but lies, the girl equally
a cheat, and because of them this monstrous conspiracy was
happening: her Patron would die and even if he
did not die, she was disgraced and would die, either
by his hand or those of the guards, everything in this life
wasted, never to marry her samurai, never to have
sons, never in this life, better to end it quickly
by her own hand than foully by theirs but how, how, and
then she remembered Sumomo's knife ...
  Yoshi craning around from the floor, frantic
to see the next throw, hauling his feet under him for the
charge he had to make or die, everything taking so
much time, his mind exploding that he had been nursing
a viper in his embrace, then his eyes saw
Sumomo's hand with the second shuriken--how many
does she have?--her lips drawn back from her very
white teeth ...
  The frozen instant ended.
  Sumomo hesitated, exulting in the kill, but
the moment was too long and she saw Koiko come out
of her trance and the knife appear in her hand.
Instinctively she shifted her aim, caught
herself, wavered, aimed at Yoshi again and began the
throw, but at that instant Koiko lurched forward,
tripped over her hem and sprawled toward her.
  The spinning shuriken embedded itself in Koiko's
chest and she cried out and that gave Yoshi time
to lunge at Sumomo from the floor. He caught
one of her ankles and brought her down, stabbed
fingers for her throat but she was an eel and twisted
away, trained in martial arts, her hand seeking
the last shuriken. Before she could reach it, his iron
fingers grabbed part of her kimono, tore half the
sleeve off, inhibiting her. Again she squirmed
from his grasp and was on her feet in a second, but
now he was too.
  At once she shrieked a nerve-racking
battle cry, bunched her hand and threw again. He
was transfixed, dead--yet her hand was empty, the
throw only a feint, the last shuriken still caught
in her torn sleeve.
  As she groped for it the shoji behind her was jerked
open by the guard. "Quick," she shouted, pointing at
Koiko writhing and moaning on the floor,
distracting and directing him. As he darted forward,
she ripped his long sword out of its sheath, raised
it and hacked, wounding him, and in the same movement
turned for Yoshi. But he had leapt back a
pace, jumped over Koiko's prone, squirming
body and sprinted for the inner room and his swords,
bursting through the closed shoji, Sumomo in fierce
pursuit.
  His sword hissed out of the scabbard. He
spun, parried the first blow violently, and
pivoted in the enclosed space. Fearlessly
Sumomo attacked and was again parried while
Yoshi measured her and she measured him. Another
flurry of blows, she an impeccable sword
fighter, as he was.
  Now he attacked and was held and they broke
off and circled, then she darted back through the shoji
seeking more space, he close behind her and they
circled seeking an opening. Outside there were
shouts. Guards converged, the wounded samurai
half blocking the doorway. Knowing there was little time
Sumomo increased the pressure, lunged forward,
then swivelled to put her back to the door and they
hacked at each other, parry and blow,
parry and blow. Yoshi twisted, forcing her around
once more, but losing the initiative.
  He saw Abeh rush for her back, sword
raised, and he snarled, "No! Leave her
to me!" and almost got decapitated, retreating in
temporary disorder.
  Obediently Abeh backed off. Another
wild skirmish, Yoshi regaining his balance just in
time. Both of them well matched, Yoshi vastly
more strong though not as practiced.
  Now their hilts locked. Quickly she disengaged,
knowing he must beat her in such a clinch, stepped
back, feinted then hurtled forward in a blind,
unorthodox blitz, her sword edge cut
into his shoulder. It would have disabled a less
skilled fighter, but he had anticipated the blow
and suffered only a minor wound though he cried out
and dropped his guard pretending a great hurt.
Carelessly she went in for the kill. But he was not
exactly where she expected. His sword arched up
ferociously from the ground catching her unawares, the
blow slicing through her left wrist and sending it
flying with the sword, her fingers still gripping the
hilt.
  She stared at the stump of her arm astonished,
blood spurting up and out in a huge stream. There
was no pain. Her other hand grabbed the stump and
slowed the flow. Guards raced forward to seize her
but again Yoshi cursed them away, his chest heaving as
he tried to catch his breath, watching her so very
carefully. "Who are you?"
  "Sumomo Fujahito ... shishi," she
gasped, her courage and strength ebbing fast, then,
with the last of her spirit, whimpered,
"sonno-joiiii," released her grip on her
wrist, groped for the last shuriken, found it, dug
one of the poisoned barbs into her arm and stumbled
forward to jam it into him. But he stood ready.
  The great blow took her perfectly where her
neck joined her body and sliced across and through her
to come out just under her arm. Those watching sucked in their
breaths as one man, sure that they had witnessed a
happening that would be passed from mouth to mouth for
centuries and proved this man a worthy
descendent of the great Sh@ogun and bearer of his name.
But all were rocked also, at the sight of so much
blood.
  Abeh recovered his voice first. "What
happened, Lord?"
  "I won," Yoshi said grimly,
examining his shoulder, blood staining his kimono,
an ache in his side and his heart still violent.
"Get a doctor ... then we'll leave."
  Men raced to do his bidding. Abeh tore his
eyes off Sumomo's corpse. Koiko was
moaning and squirming pitifully, her nails
clawing the tatami, gashing it. He went towards
her, stopped as Yoshi said, "Careful, fool!
She was part of the conspiracy!" Cautiously
Abeh kicked Sumomo's knife to one side.
"Turn her over!" He obeyed, with his foot.
  There was only the slightest sign of blood.
The shuriken had pinned her kimono to her flesh,
stanching the seepage, more than half of the steel
buried in her. Apart from the pulsating agony that
twisted her face in waves, she was as breathtaking
as ever.
  Yoshi was filled with hatred.
  Never had he been so close to death. The other
attack was nothing compared to this one. How he had
managed to withstand the onslaught and sneak attack,
he could not understand. Half a dozen times he had
been, knowingly, beaten, and the terror at the brink was
not as he had imagined it to be. That terror will
unman anyone, he thought, wanting to hack
Koiko to pieces in fury for her betrayal, or
to leave her to her agony.
  Her hands were clawing impotently at her chest,
at the huge pain centered there, trying to tear away
the thing that was causing it. But she could not. A shudder
racked her. Her eyes opened and she saw Yoshi
standing there and her hands left her chest and went to her
face, trying to make her hair neat for him.
"Help me, Tora-chan," she sobbed, her words
garbled, "please helllp meeee ... it hurts
..."
  "Who sent you? And her? Who?"
  "Helpppp me, oh please, it hurts, it
hurts, I tried to save ... save ..." Her
words trailed away and she saw herself again with the
knife in her hand, him defenseless, heroically
doing her duty, rushing forward to protect him,
to give him the knife she could not herself use and
to prevent the betrayer from wounding him with the flying
steel, accepting it in his place, saving his life
so he would reward her and forgive her, not that she was
guilty of anything, only of serving him pleasing
him adoring him ...
  "What shall we do with her?" Abeh was asking
queasily, certain, with all of them that the
shuriken was poisoned and she would die, some
poisons more cruel than others.
  Throw her on a dung heap, was Yoshi's immediate
thought, his stomach filled with sick sweet bile,
and leave her to her pain and the dogs. He scowled,
tormented now, seeing she was still beautiful, even still
desirable, only the dribbling moan underscoring his
ugly, acid awareness that an era had ended.
  Now and forevermore he would be alone. She had
destroyed trust. If this woman on whom he had
lavished so much affection could betray him, anyone
could. Never again could he trust a woman or share
so much. Never. She had destroyed that part of him
forever. His face closed. "Throw ..."
  And then he remembered her silly poems and
happy poems, all the laughter and pleasures
she had given him, the good advice and
satisfactions. Abruptly he was consumed with
immense sadness at the cruelty of life. His
sword was still in his hand. Her neck was so small.
The blow was kind.
  "Sonno-joi, eh?" he muttered, blind at
her loss.
  Cursed shishi, their fault she is dead. Who
sent Sumomo? Katsumata! Must be, same
sword strokes, same guile. Twice his
assassins have almost killed me. No third time.
I will wipe them out. Until I am dead
Katsumata is enemy, all shishi are enemy.
Cursed shishi--and cursed gai-jin!
  It is really their fault, the gai-jin.
They're a plague. If it wasn't for them none
of this would have happened, there would be no stinking
Treaties, no shishi, no sonno-joi, and no
pussing sore of Yokohama.
  Cursed gai-jin. Now they will pay.

                 

              YOKOHAMA

  On the afternoon of the same day, Jamie McFay
came out of the office of the Yokohama
Guardian seething. He stuffed the latest
edition of the newspaper under his arm and hurried
along High Street. The breeze was salty and
chill, the sea spotted with combers, grey and
uninviting. His stride was as angry as his mood.
I wish to God Malcolm had told me, he was
thinking. He's off his rocker, crazy.
It's bound to stir up trouble.
  "Wot's up?" Lunkchurch asked, seeing the
crumpled paper and perturbed by Jamie's
unusual haste. He himself had been on the way
to collect his own copy before his afternoon siesta and had
stopped for a moment to urinate in the gutter.
"Hey, the duel's in the paper, been reported,
eh?"
  "What duel?" McFay snapped. Rumors
were rife that it was due any day now, though, as
yet, no one had whispered they knew it was the day
after tomorrow, Wednesday. "For Christ's sake stop
spreading that chestnut!"
  "No offense, old lad." The big, florid
man buttoned up, heaving his belt up over his
paunch to have it slide down again. "Well wot the
eff's up?" He jabbed the paper. "Wot's
effing Nettlesmith writ that's put your dingle out
of joint?"
  "Just more of the same," McFay said, avoiding the
real reason. "His editorial claims the
fleet's almost up to snuff, Army's sharpening their
bayonets, and ten thousand sepoys are on the way
from India to help us."
  "Eff'ing balls, all of it!"
  "Yes. Added to that the bloody Governor doing
his usual, sodding up Hong Kong's economy.
Nettlesmith's reprinted an editorial from the
Times praising the plan to torch our Bengal
opium fields, replanting with tea, a little
item that'll cause heart attacks all over
Asia--as if taste buds anywhere will be
satisfied with Darjeeling muck! Stupid
bastards will ruin us and the British economy at the
same time. Got to run, see you at the meeting
later."
  "Eff'ing meetings! Waste of eff'ing time,"
Lunkchurch said. "Eff'ing government! We should
go to the eff'ing barricades like the eff'ing Frogs.
And we should be shelling Yedo right now! Wee
Willie hasn't the balls, and as for eff'ing
Ketterer ..." He continued swearing long after
Jamie had left. Others on the promenade
nearby frowned, then quickened their pace heading for the
newspaper office.
  Malcolm Struan looked up as Jamie
knocked. He saw the paper at once. "Good.
I was going to ask if it was here yet."
  "I fetched a copy. A dickybird
whispered I should."
  "Ah." Malcolm grinned. "My letter's in?
It's there?"
  "You might have told me so I could think of a
way to lessen the impact."
  "Calm down, for God's sake," Malcolm
said, good-naturedly, taking the paper and turning
to the section where letters were printed. "No harm in
taking a moral position. Opium's immoral,
and so is gunrunning, and I didn't tell you because
I wanted you to be surprised too."
  "You've certainly done that! This will incense every
trader here and throughout Asia and it'll backfire,
we need friends just as much as they need us."
  "I agree. But why should my letter backfire?
Ah!" His letter was in the lead position and headlined:
NOBLE HOUSE TO TAKE NOBLE STAND!
"Good caption, I like that."
  "Sorry but I don't. It's bound
to backfire because everyone knows we have to use those
trade goods or we're stuffed. You're tai-pan
but you can't ..." Jamie paused. Malcolm was
smiling at him unperturbed. "What about the
Choshu rifles for goodness' sake? We've
accepted their money though you agreed to pass them
over to the other man, Watanabe, for Lord Someone
or other--the order you increased to five thousand?"
  "All in due time." Malcolm remained
calm though reminded that his mother had cancelled the
order that he had, promptly, reinstated by the
fastest mail possible. Silly of her, she
understands nothing about Japan. Never mind, only a
few more days and she'll be curbed. "Meanwhile,
Jamie, there's no harm in taking a public,
moral position," he said airily. "We must
bend with the times, don't you think?"
  McFay blinked. "You mean it's a ploy?
To confuse the opposition?"
  "Bend with the times," Malcolm repeated
happily. His letter advocated, at length, the
phasing out of opium and guns, just as the Admiral
wanted, and put him squarely behind the
Admiral's vehement position and the Government's
proposed new plan for Asia: Ways must be
found at once to put our trading approach on the
most perfect footing, for the greater glory of
H.m. the Queen, God Bless Her, and our
British Empire. The Noble House is proud
to lead the way ... he had written among other
flowery effusions, signing it, The tai-pan,
Struan's, as his father and grandfather had
done with letters to the press. "I thought it was all
put rather well. Don't you?"
  "Yes it is," McFay said. "You certainly
convinced me. But if it's just a ..." He was going
to say "sop" but sop to who and why? "But if
it's just a ploy, why do it? Couldn't be a worse
time. You're bound to be challenged at the meeting."
  "Let them."
  "They'll think you've gone mad."
  "Let them. In a few weeks they'll have
forgotten it, and anyway we'll be in Hong
Kong." Malcolm beamed, filled with good
humor. "Don't worry, I know exactly
what I'm doing. Do me a favor, leave a
message for the Admiral, I'd like to drop by and
see him before dinner, and Marlowe when he comes
ashore. They're both dining with us at eight,
yes?"
  "Yes, both accepted." McFay sighed.
"So you're going to keep me in suspense over the
why?"
  "Don't worry, everything's perfect. Now,
much more importantly, today we must settle on
next season's order for silks. Make sure
Vargas has the books up-to-date. I want
to talk to the shroff about specie and funds as soon
as possible--don't forget, tomorrow, Angel and I
will be gone all day with Marlowe aboard Pearl."
He would have danced a jig if he could have, but his
legs and stomach were aching more than usual. Never
mind, he thought, tomorrow's the great day, I'm almost
home, then the hell with everyone.
  Jamie was finding him strange, not understanding him
at all. Every ship from Hong Kong brought both of
them another, ever more vituperative letter from Tess
Struan and yet, for the last week-odd,
Malcolm was completely at ease and as he had
been pre-Tokaid@o, good-humored, clever,
attentive and dedicated to business affairs though
still in deep discomfort and walking badly as ever. And
then there was the overriding hazard of the duel set for
Wednesday, the day after tomorrow.
  Three times McFay had approached
Norbert Greyforth to make an accommodation,
even enlisting Gornt's help, but nothing would
dissuade the man: "Jamie, you tell the young
bugger it's up to him, by God," Norbert had
said. "He started this shit. If he
apologizes I'll accept it--if it's
public, and mighty public at that!"
  McFay bit his lip. His last resort was
to whisper the time and the place to Sir William but
he hated the idea of breaking his solemn oath.
"I'm to meet with that bugger Gornt at six
o'clock, to fix the final details."
  "Good. Sorry you don't like him, he's a good
fellow, Jamie. Really. I invited him tonight.
"Dinna fash yoursel"." Malcolm aped a
heavy Scottish accent as a pleasantry.
  McFay smiled, soothed by the friendliness. "Do
y--" A knock interrupted him.
  "Come in."
  Dmitri strode in like a bad squall and
left the door open behind him. "You gone crazy,
Malc? How can Struan's back these assholes
about opium and guns?"
  "No harm in taking a moral position,
Dmitri."
  "There is by God if it's crazy. If
Struan's take that position, the rest of us are
fighting uphill for crissake, goddam Wee
Willie will use that to--" He stopped as
Norbert Greyforth stalked in without knocking.
  "Have you gone bloody mad?" Norbert
snarled, leaning over the desk and waving the paper in
Malcolm's face. "What about our bloody
agreement to act together, eh?"
  Malcolm stared up at him, hating him,
instantly colorless. "If you want an
appointment, make it," he said icily, but
controlled. "I'm busy. Get out. Please!"
  Norbert flushed, also on notice by Sir
William to behave or else. His face twisted
with anger. "Wednesday, early, by God! Just
bloody be there!" He spun on his feet and
stalked away. The door slammed behind him.
  "Rude bastard," Malcolm said mildly.
  Normally Dmitri would have laughed but he was
too concerned. "While we're on that subject,
I might as well tell you I'm not taking part in
Wednesday's "meeting.""
  "That's no problem, Dmitri," Malcolm
said. Color was coming back into his face. "I still
have your word, gentleman's honor, that nothing
leaks."
  "Sure." Then Dmitri burst out, "Don't
do it, you could get seriously hurt."
  "I'm seriously hurt now, old chap.
Please don't worry. If Norbert keeps
our date he's ..." Malcolm was
going to say, he's a dead man, and tempted
to disclose Gornt's scheme to Dmitri--he had
already explained it to McFay who had,
reluctantly, approved it as workable--but
decided not to.
  Instead he said, "I've already offered Norbert
a private accommodation but he spurned that.
I'm damned if I'll crawl in public.
Listen, while you're here, what about Colt
Armaments? I hear Cooper-Tillman have a
block of shares they want to sell. I'd like
to buy."
  "Eh? How d'you know about them?" Dmitri
glanced at McFay who was equally astonished but
had managed to hide it. "Where'd you hear about that?"
  "A dickybird told me." Malcolm hid
his glee. Edward Gornt had given him the tip,
amongst other inside tips about Brock's and
Cooper-Tillman, to prove his sincerity about the
major information he would pass over about the
Brocks. "Why wait to tell me, Mr.
Gornt," he had said. "If the information is as
good as you say it will need dealing with at once."
  "It will, yes, at once, Tai-pan. But
let's leave it as we agreed: Wednesday's the
day. Meanwhile, as we're going to have a long and
happy relationship, why not let's drop the
"Mister," you call me just Gornt, I'll stay
with "Tai-pan" until we meet in Shanghai
or Hong Kong--after Sir Morgan's ruined.
Then, maybe, we could be on a first-name basis,
eh?"'
  He watched Dmitri, his excitement
increased. So much good happening now. "What do you
say, old chap? Is Jeff Cooper prepared
to sell, and you have the necessary authority to deal?"
  "Yes I have his authority but."
  "But nothing. The authority's in writing?"
  "In writing and he might sell half but.
At the right price--16.50 a share."
  "Balls, that's nowhere near right--that's your
Medicine Man approach coming out. 13.20 not a
cent more. We can draw up a letter of intent, dated
today. Forty thousand shares."
  Dmitri gaped at him but quickly recovered--
forty thousand was exactly the right number. 13.20
was low. He had offered the shares to Morgan
Brock who had tendered 12.80, a fire-sale
price, with a year payout which made the offer
unpalatable, though to find a buyer for
such a large block of shares was almost impossible.
Where the hell did Malc get the information?
"13.20's no where near good enough."
  "13.20 today. Tomorrow it'll be 13.10,
Wednesday I withdraw the bid." Gornt had
told him Cooper needed to sell quickly to invest in
a new U.s. venture-making Ironclads--for
either navy. "I've plenty of time, but old
Jeff hasn't."
  "What you mean by that?"
  "Just that I have time and Jeff hasn't. Nor
has the Union or even Confederate ...
navy," he added pleasantly, "with the war going
badly for both sides."
  "Crap on your spies," Dmitri said.
"No deal. 15.20."
  "Dreamer. 13.20, payment in gold from a
sight draft on our bank as soon as it
arrives in Boston."
  Dmitri opened his mouth but Jamie McFay
butted in hastily, "Tai-pan, it might be a
good idea to conside--"
  ""... getting HK'S approval,""
Malcolm finished the sentence for him. "Come on,
Jamie, we've had that out and that nonsense is
finished once and for all." His voice was level,
and brooked no argument. "Right?"
  "Yes, sorry, you're right."
  Calmly Malcolm said, "Well,
Dmitri, yes or no?"
  Dmitri stared at him with renewed respect.
The immediate payout had already clinched it for him.
"It's a deal." He offered his hand. Malcolm
shook it.
  McFay said, "I'll draw up the paper this
afternoon and have it for your signatures at 5:00
P.m. all right?"
  "Good. Thanks for coming to see me, Dmitri,
you're always welcome. Dinner's at 8:30."
  After Dmitri left McFay could not stay
quiet. "That's a lot of money."
  "dis528,000 to be precise. But Colt's
got a new order for a hundred thousand rifles
of a radical new design. By the time our letter of
credit clears their shares will have doubled so we've just
made half a million dollars."
  "How can you be sure?"
  "I'm sure."
  "You'll sign the promissory note?"
  "Yes. If you tell me I can't
because I've no authority because of what my mother has
or has not said, I will take no notice
whatsoever and sign it anyway." Malcolm lit
a cheroot, continuing, "If it's not honored that will
backfire and ruin Struan's like nothing in our
history. I'm tai-pan, like it or not, until
I resign or until I'm dead, whatever she
says."
  They both watched a smoke ring rise and
vanish and then McFay nodded, slowly, his
misgivings overcome by Malcolm's strange
surety and authority that he had never experienced
before. "You know what you're doing, don't you?"
  Malcolm's eyes lit up. "I know many
things I didn't when I first came here. For
example, if you insist on leaving ... Come on,
Jamie, I'm sure in your heart you've
decided, and why shouldn't you? You've been treated
shabbily--I know I haven't helped but that's
all over, if I were you I'd do the same.
You've decided, haven't you?"
  McFay swallowed, disarmed. "Yes, I'm
going to leave, but not until Struan's business
here is optimum, six months or so, unless she
fires me first. Christ, I don't want
to leave but I must."
  Malcolm laughed. "You've taken a moral
position."
  McFay laughed too. "Hardly. It's
crazy."
  "No, I'd do the same. And I'm sure
you'll be a huge success, so much so a hundred
thousand of the dollars I've just made--I have,
Jamie, no one else--will be an investment in
McFay Trading. For a ..." He was going
to say forty-nine percent share but changed that,
to give McFay face, and thought, You deserve
it, my friend, I'll never forget the mail you could have
hanged for--Sir William would have caught us,
I'm sure of that too. "... a sixty percent
share?"
  McFay said, "Twenty-five," without even
thinking.
  "Fifty-five?"
  "Thirty-five."
  "Forty-nine percent."
  "Done, if!"
  They both laughed and Malcolm said what
McFay had been thinking, "If the shares double."
Then he added seriously, "And if they
don't I'll find it another way."
  McFay looked at him for what seemed a
long time, his mind in a thought pattern of questions but
no answers. Why has Malcolm changed?
Heavenly? The business over the mails? The
duel? Surely not. Why does he want to see
the Admiral? Why does he like Gornt who's
a crafty if I ever saw one?
  And why did I blurt out, Yes I'm going
to leave, before I knew it, making the decision
I'd been thinking about for months: to take a chance
before I die. He saw Malcolm watching him,
weak in body, but tranquil and strong. He
smiled back, glad to be alive. "You know,
I'm sure you will."

  Angelique was taking her pre-dinner siesta,
a coal fire merry in the grate. Curtains were
drawn against the wind and she was curled under down
covers and silk sheets, half asleep half
awake, one hand comfortably between her legs as
Colette had taught her in the convent when they would
sneak into bed with one another after the nuns had left
the dormitory and were snoring behind their curtained
cubicles. Fondling and kissing and whispering and
chuckling under the covers, the two young girls sharing
secrets and dreams and wants, pretending to be
grown-up lovers--as described in the romantic
but forbidden street pamphlets that were smuggled in
by the chambermaids and circulated from hand to hand
amongst the students--all make-believe and
healthy and amusing and harmless.
  Her mind was on Paris and the wonderful future
ahead, Malcolm softly content beside her, or
already out in the Struan countinghouse, now
headquartered in Paris, rich and tall, all his
bad health a memory, her bad not even a
memory, a baby son in the nursery along the
corridor of this their chateau, his own nanny and
maids watching him, her body again strong and as
well shaped as now, his birth easy. Then there would
be visits with Colette to Struan's
fabulously successful silk factory that she
had persuaded Struan's to build after learning so
much about the harvesting and growing of the silkworms:
  "Oh Colette," she had just written,

these little worms are extra-ordinary, eating
mulberry leaves for food, and then you cure the
cocoons and unravel the silk. ...
I never thought I could be so interested. Vargas is
my secret informant and he sneaked the silk
seller in to show me some, but I have to be so careful
--I started talking about my idea for a factory
with Malcolm and Jamie and they laughed.
Malcolm said not to be silly, making silk was a
highly complex business (as if I didn't know)
and not to worry my little head about business. I do
believe they want us to be cocoons, to use or
abuse at their whim, and that's all. Colette,
send all the books on silk you can find ...

  How lovely to have one's own countinghouse, and
money, she thought. Living in Paris there will be
visits to London, occasionally to Hong Kong,
dinners and soirees and lavish balls for my
Prince Charming and his special friends ...
  She glanced at the letter to Colette on the
bureau she had just sealed. More secrets shared, at
least, in part:

  This Edward Gornt is becoming a real friend,
so charming and attentive, a real friend, not like
Andr`e. I'm sure, dear Colette, he will be
a friend for life because my darling Malcolm seems
to enjoy his company too. Isn't that strange--when
Edward works for those awful Brocks I've told
you about, and Norbert Greyforth who gets more
venomous-looking every day, like the warlock he is!
Tonight we are having another BIG soiree.
Everyone will be there, Andr`e is playing, Edward,
he is a dancer, light as a butterfly ...

  She had not written that the last time they had
danced, at a dinner given by Sir William,
he had held her hand differently, dangerously,
with enough pressures to talk to her, once his little finger
curled in his palm touching hers: the language of
lovers, I want you in bed, yes or no and when
--don't say no!
  She had moved her hand, coolly and firmly.
He had said nothing, his eyes smiling, and she
knew that he knew she was not really angry,
merely beyond reach, engaged.
  Nor was she angry at Andr`e, really
angry. A few days ago they had met by chance
at the French Legation. "You're looking well,
Angelique, I'm delighted to see you. Can I
have a word, privately?"'
  She had said, of course, and when they
were alone he had told her it was about the money he
had lent her. "I'm badly strapped, could you
let me have it, please?"'
  "But I thought the ... the other transaction
covered that." Her heart had skipped a beat being
reminded of their stratagem over the lost earrings.
  "Sorry, no it didn't. That paid for the
mama-san's advice and the medicine."
  Her flush had been sudden. "We agreed
never to mention the, the matter, ever again, don't you
remember?"' she said quietly, wanting to shout
at him for disturbing their solemn agreement. "It
never happened, it didn't, that's what we agreed
--it was just a bad dream!"
  "I agree it never happened but you mentioned the
transaction, Angelique, I didn't bring it
up, just about the money. Sorry but the money's
pressing." His face had gone cold.
  Warily she had bottled her anger, damning
him for disturbing her peace. She had convinced herself
nothing had ever happened--except for the one man who
could dispute it, nothing had. That was the truth. But for
him. "About the money, dear friend, I'll return
it as soon as I can. Malcolm doesn't give
me money as you know, just lets me sign chits."
  "Then perhaps we'd better arrange another
"loss.""
  "No," she had said, her voice honeyed, and
put a hand on his arm to soothe the flash of anger,
"That's not a good idea." Though she purged the
whole affair from her mind, for the most part, whenever it
came back to haunt her, particularly at
night, she was aware it had been a dreadful
mistake. "Perhaps I can think of another
way."
  "I need it now, Wednesday at the latest.
Sorry."
  "I'll try, I'll really try." And she
had. Yesterday she had seen Henri Seratard and
tearfully begged and pleaded, saying she needed
money for a surprise for Malcolm, that she would be
always in his debt and signed another piece of
paper, pledging her diamond engagement ring as
surety.
  Wisely she had borrowed twice as much as she
owed. This morning she had repaid Andr`e. He had
thanked her and thanked her. No reason to be
angry with him. He's my good and trusted friend and
I did borrow the money. What did I need it
for? I forget. Sans faire
rien, that's one debt repaid.
  Half the rest she had taken to McFay.
"Jamie, would you send this to my dearest aunt in
Paris for me. She's poorly and also, my dear
uncle," she had told him, pleased she at
last could help them, and even more pleased that, as she
had hoped, McFay had told Malcolm. He
had asked her about it.
  "Oh I borrowed it from Monsieur
Seratard, my darling. I didn't want to ask
you for money and I can't send them a chit. I
hope you don't mind but I pledged some
jewelry."
  He had chided her, saying he would take care
of the Seratard debt, that Jamie would have a
revolving fund for her, the value of a hundred
guineas which she could draw against as she wished, just
give him note of what it's for, and that he would
double the amount she wanted sent.
  So easy when you use your intelligence. A
warmth went through her remembering how she had thanked
him for his kindness, and kissed him so fondly, and
how he had responded. She would have liked to have
gone further, much further.
  Her fingers distracted her. Their smoothly knowing
sensuality pleased her and she closed her eyes and
cast herself back with Colette but that did not last
long. As always he loomed in the front of her
mind, vivid and almost alive, and with him the
details of their last time, the time she had been
deliberately wanton and had done everything she
had dreamt possible--to save her life, not
realizing she would enjoy everything as much as he had.
  Dearest Blessed Mother, we both know it was only
to save my life--isn't that true? But also
true--ah, how lucky I am I can talk
openly, direct to You, and not have to go through that awful
Father Leo--but also true, between us women, that somehow
we must rid ourselves of him, and the memory of the two
nights and the ecstasy before it drives me insane.

  Raiko was irritable. "Furansu-san, I
will accept this partial payment but our agreement was very
specific, so sorry."
  "I know." Andr`e loathed being in debt--a
phobia--to her more than any, not only because meeting
the payment schedule was giving him nightmares, but
also because she controlled his Hinodeh completely and
if he failed to conform she would end their relationship
without hesitation. And then he would kill
himself. "Soon can give big payment. Earrings."
  "Ah, is that so? Excellent." She smiled.
"Excellent. I presume Hinodeh is still
to your liking, still pleasing you?"
  His worry dropped from him for a blessed moment.
"She ... everything I dream of. M."
  She smiled strangely at him. "It is
unwise to be so open, my friend."
  A Gallic shrug. "You make me lifetime
favor. Cannot say thank you enough."
  The eyes crinkled in her round face, puffy from
drink even though it was only dusk. Her makeup
was good and her kimono expensive, the evening
chilly but her rooms were warm and the whole Inn
inviting. "I hear your gai-jin Princess is as
healthy as ever."
  "Yes." For a moment Andr`e thought about her, and
her ever-present sexuality. "Think she make
good Lady of Night."
  Raiko cocked her head to one side, unable
to resist taking the remark seriously. "That would be
interesting to me. I could get her the best prices
--the best--many in Yedo would pay a price
to sample such a gross person. I know one
rice dealer, very rich very old, no hard work for her
to satisfy, who would pay huge money to be the first
to examine such a Jade Gate, and it would be
easy to show her how to become a virgin again,
neh?"
  He laughed. "I tell her, one day perhaps."
  "Good. The best price, and secret. This
rice dealer ... Eeee, he would pay! She
shows no other signs?"
  "Signs? What sort of signs?"
  Raiko said, "The medicine varies for different
ladies. Sometimes it can make them much more ... more
passionate and more difficult to satisfy. Sometimes
it increases her chance to become pregnant, sometime
it destroys any chance. Strange, neh?"
  The amusement left him. "You not tell me."
  "Would it have made any difference?"
  After a moment he shook his head.
  She drank deeply. "Please excuse me
for speaking about money, but a gold oban no longer
buys what a gold oban should buy. Our
officials have debased our currency and stink like
eight-day-old fish mixed with fresh dog's
droppings!"
  "True," he said, missing words but understanding about
officials and old fish and was equally
disgusted. Seratard had refused to give him the
advance on his salary he had expected, claiming
poverty in Legation funds. "But Henri,
I'm only asking for what you have to give me over
the year. It's just a few pieces of gold,
Henri. Aren't I your most valuable aide
here?"'
  "Yes of course you are, my dear Andr`e, but
you can't get wine out of an empty vat--only a
migraine!"
  He tried a different approach but did no
better. So he had only two courses of
action. Angelique, or this mama-san.
"Raiko-san, you very clever, think. Must be way
we both increase normal money, neh? What
can we sell?"
  She glanced down at the table to hide.
"Sak`e?" she asked and poured. In his honor the
sak`e was cold. Her eyes were slits and she
wondered how far to trust him. As far as a cat will
trust a cornered mouse. "Information has a
price. Neh?"
  It was said matter-of-factly. He pretended
to be surprised, delighted she had taken the
bait so easily. Too easily? Probably
not. Being caught by the Bakufu, or by his own
masters added up to same penalty: an agonizing
death.
  Sir William would pay handsomely for the right
information--Henri not at all--God curse them
both to hell! "Raiko-san, what happening in
Yedo?"
  "More to the point, what's happening here?" she said
at once, beginning the negotiation. "War, eh?
Terrible! Every day more soldiers firing on the firing
range, more cannons practicing, frightening my
Ladies."
  "So sorry, please speak slower, please."
  "Ah so sorry." Raiko slowed, saying how
frightened the Yoshiwara was, painting an interesting
local picture but nothing that he did not already
know. And he told her things about the fleet and
Army that he was sure she knew also.
  They drank in silence. Then she said softly,
"I think certain officials would pay much to know
what the gai-jin leader plans to do and when."
  He nodded. "Yes. Also think our Leader
pay plenty know what Nippon samurai forces
where, who leads, about this tair@o who send rude
messages."
  She beamed gloriously and raised her eggshell
cup. "To a new partnership. Much money for a little
talk."
  He toasted her, saying carefully, "Little
talk yes, but must be important little and real little
for real money."
  "Eeee," she said, feigning shock, "am I
a third-class whore without brains? Without
honor? Without understanding? Without connections, without
..." But she could not keep it up and chuckled.
"We understand one another completely. Tomorrow at
midday come and see me. Now off you go and see your
lovely Hinodeh. Enjoy her and life while
we all have it."
  "Thank you. But not now. Please say, I
arrive later." He smiled at Raiko, liking
her. "But you, Raiko?"
  "I have no Hinodeh, to go to, to dream about,
to write poems to, to fill me with ecstasy.
Once it was different, now I am more sensible, I
enjoy sak`e and making money and making money and
sak`e. Off you go," she said with a hard laugh, "but
tomorrow return. At midday."
  When he was gone she ordered her maids to bring
more of the wine, but hot this time, and not to disturb her.
Seeing such friendliness on his face, mixed with the
depth of his passion for Hinodeh, she had felt
her sadness beginning and so had dismissed him.
  She could not bear witnesses to her misery and the
abject tears that poured from her, unable to contain them
or the grief, at the same time despising the
weakness within her that was a frantic longing for her
youth, for the girl she had been, vanished such a
short time ago, never to return.
  It's not fair not fair not fair, she moaned,
raising the cup. I'm not the old hag I see in
my mirror, I am me, Raiko the
Beautiful, Courtesan of the Second rank,
I am I am I am.

  "Ah, Otami-sama," the shoya said, "good
evening, please sit down, tea, sak`e? So
sorry to disturb you again but I have just received a
message from my overlords. Tea?"
  Hiraga took the opposite cushion in the
pleasant room, a hold on his impatience,
thanked him and accepted the obligatory cup.
"How are you?" he asked politely, his heart
beating faster than he cared.
  "Worried, Otami-sama. It
seems the gai-jin are very determined this time, too
many troop movements, too many ships cleaning
weapons, many rumors of more ships coming here. Perhaps
you have heard from your Taira gai-jin?"
  Hiraga thought about that. Tyrer and the whole
Legation staff had been in an uproar ever since
the ultimatum from Tair@o Anjo had arrived,
Sir William bellowing more than usual,
Johann the interpreter closeted for hours with
Tyrer, rewriting letters to the Bakufu and only
sometimes asking him to refine a phrase.
"Easier if see 'retter, Taira-sama,"
he would always say, wanting to know what was being sent.
  "Yes, well, but this phrase for the moment
..." the Taira would always say, clearly
uneasy, every day the same and this had increased his
disquiet. Obviously they did not trust him as
before, and this after working night and day to learn their
language and giving them all manner of information.
Despicable gai-jin dogs, he had thought,
afraid that any day Sir William might
order him out--his poster was still prominent in the
samurai guard house, the enforcer patrols
malevolently checking all Japanese entering and
leaving the Settlement.
  Enforcer patrols should not be permitted.
Gai-jin are so idiotic--with their sea power I
would not allow "enemy guards" within a league!
Idiotic for Anjo to anger them with such vile
manners and arrogance while their fleet is here.
The Council of Elders is mad!
  "The gai-jin officials tell me many things,
shoya," he said, as though loath to be overheard.
"Fortunately I am party to their inner secrets.
It may well be I can warn you in time if any
danger threatens you. Meanwhile I counselled
them to beware of upsetting you and the village."
  The shoya bowed to the tatami, thanking him and
thanking him, then said, "These are terrible times, war
is terrible and taxes are going to be put up
again."
  Good, Hiraga thought, his head aching, you can
afford it, but it won't make you or any in the
Gyokoyama eat less or drink less, or
your wives and women dress less expensively,
only your customers. Parasites! You're already
breaking ancient laws of extravagance allowing
your women to wear forbidden dress colors, like red,
as under-kimonos or in your homes that, stupidly,
the Bakufu, do not enforce. When we are
in power there will be a reckoning.
  Come on, you old fool, get to the point. I
cannot waste all evening and I am not going to lose
face by asking, I have more studies tonight and another
book to try to read. "I can perhaps guard your
interests," he said pointedly.
  Again the shoya thanked him. "The message I
received concerned the girl you asked about. Four days
ago Lord Yoshi left Ky@oto secretly, just
before dawn, with a small escort of soldiers and
disguised as one of them. She went too. Also in the
party ... are you all right, Otami-sama?"
  "Yes, please go on," Hiraga said, "go
on, shoya."
  "Certainly. Also in the party, mounted, was the
courtesan Koiko, and the girl who is her new
maiko an--"
  "Her what?" Hiraga gasped, "Koiko"
with everything that her name implied pealing in all the
corners of his mind.
  "Please, may I give you some tea, or
sak`e?" the shoya asked, seeing the impact the
news was making. "Or a hot towel or may I
order som--"
  "No, go on," Hiraga said, his voice
throaty.
  "There is not much more. As you know the Lady
Koiko is the most famous of Yedo's
courtesans and now Lord Yoshi's companion. The
girl was sent to her ten days ago."
  "By whom?"
  "We do not yet know, Otami-sama," the
shoya said, retaining that information for another time.
"It seems the Lady Koiko accepted the girl
as maiko after the girl was personally interviewed
and approved by Lord Yoshi. She is the only
other woman in the party. Her name is Sumomo
Fujahito."
  No mistake, Hiraga wanted to shout, that's
the code name Katsumata gave her--so he sent
her into that hornet's nest, but why? "Which way did
he go? Lord Yoshi?"
  "There are forty samurai accompanying him,
all mounted but carrying no banners, and Lord
Yoshi himself, as I said, was disguised. They
slipped out of Ky@oto just before dawn, three days
ago, heading along the Tokaid@o, a forced march,
my masters presume for Yedo." The shoya hid
his astonishment at the vehemence in the young man's
face.
  "Forced march you say? They could reach
Kanagawa, when?" The last way station before
Yedo. "In ten or twelve more days?"
  "Ah, yes, you are probably right though with
two women travelling ... my message said
both were riding--oh, I already mentioned that--and oh
yes, I forgot, Lord Yoshi was disguised as a
common ashigari, yes I suppose it is
possible to reach Kanagawa then."
  Dazed, Hiraga swallowed more sak`e,
hardly tasting it, accepted another cup, thanked
him for the information, saying they would meet tomorrow and left
to go to the village hovel he shared with Akimoto.
  Outside the village streets were quiet.
Shops closed at nightfall. Lights behind
shoji screens made the huts and hovels
inviting. Wearily, and in turmoil over the
news, he took off his top hat and ruffled his
hair, scratching his scalp, still not completely
accustomed to wearing his hair European style,
though lately hardly noticed the discomfort of
trousers and waistcoat, glad for them against the
season's cold. Even scratching vigorously
did not help the confusion and ache in his head so he
sat on a nearby bench--squatting difficult in
tight trousers--and stared at the sky.
  Koiko! He remembered the two times he had
been with her, once for an evening and once for the
night. Eeee, both had been expensive, so
expensive, but worth it. Katsumata had told
him that never again would he perceive such texture of
skin or silky hair or such fragrance, or such
kind, gentle laughter in a woman's eyes, or
experience the ultimate, exploding warmth that
made you want to die, you had so much joy.
  "Ah, Hiraga, to die then,"
Katsumata had said, "at such a high point,
to carry that with you beyond--if there is a beyond--would be
perfection. Or if there is no beyond, to be certain
at the leap into nothingness you have experienced the best,
to die at the zenith would surely be a totality of
life?"'
  "True, but such waste. Why train her for
Yoshi?"'
  "Because he is a major key to sonno-joi,
for or against, because she is the only one I have ever
known who might possibly enthrall him and so
move him to our side, or be positioned to send him
onwards. He may be the key to sonno-joi,
for or against--that's our secret, yours and
mine--of course he dies at a time of our
choosing anyway."
  Then has Katsumata sent Sumomo to be the
dagger of the deed? Or is it to keep Koiko
safe from betrayers, or even to guard Yoshi from a
traitor within?
  So many questions, so much unanswered.
  He got up and walked off again, his head aching
worse than ever. Tomorrow Akimoto was going with
Taira aboard a warship. Hiraga had asked
to go but had been refused: "So sorry,"
Tyrer had told him, "Sir William said this
friend of yours, Mr. Saito, may go, but only
him. Of course no weapons. I understand his
family is the biggest shipbuilder in
Shimonoseki, eh?"'
  "Yes, Taira-sama. His father
fami'ry."
  "But samurai are not allowed to be in
business."
  "That is correct, Taira-sama," he
had said quickly, the man too apt a pupil,
making the lie sound truthful. "But many samurai
fami'ries make arrangement with money 'renders
and boat makers to do work, neh? This man
important sea fami'ry."
  A week ago he had introduced the subject
of Akimoto, with that fiction, during one of his
endless meetings with Sir William where he stood
and answered questions, learning little in exchange.
"His name is Saito, Sir W'ram,
fami'ry rich, he visit here want to see great
British Navy ships, hear great stories about
great British Navy. Perhaps you and he can make
together, can great ship making factory."
  It was not altogether a lie. For generations
Akimoto's forebearers had lived in a fishing
village, one of the three ashigari families there
who acted as a kind of policemen for Hiraga's
father, head of the nearby hirazamurai-ranked
family, also for generations. Akimoto personally,
had always been interested in the sea and warships.
Hiraga's father had arranged for Akimoto to join
the Choshu samurai school, ordering him to learn
all he could from the Dutch seaman who was the
sensei, because, soon, daimyo Ogama would need
officers to captain Choshu ships, and to lead their
navy.
  "Eeee, Cousin," Akimoto had said the
day before yesterday, "I cannot believe you
persuaded them to let me learn their war
secrets."
  Hiraga sighed. He had noticed that anything
to do with "business" got immediate gai-jin attention.
Poetry, not at all, calligraphy nothing,
sword-forging a little, politics, yes, but only
as it affected trade, but an opportunity
to make something to sell for profit--anything, a ship
or cannon or cup or knife or length of
silk--brought instant results. They're worse
than rich dealers! Their food is money.
  Last night Akimoto had been in his cups,
rare for him, and started to ramble about money and
gai-jin and being near them, "You are right,
Hiraga, that's one of their secrets: money
worship. Money! How clever you are to smell out
that so soon! Look at that dog of a shoya!
Look how he is all ears when you start to tell
him what Taira or that other gai-jin dog
gleefully say about their dirty business
methods, and how they extort money from others any
way they can, calling it profit, as though profit
is a clean word, feeding off each other like lice.
When you talk about money does not that old fish
head shoya bring out his best sak`e to encourage you
to tell more and more? Of course he does. He is
just like them, worshipping money, gathering it from us
samurai, putting us deeper into debt every year when
he creates nothing, nothing! We should kill him and
do what Ori said, burn this stinking
cesspool--"'
  "Calm yourself! What's wrong?"'
  "I do not want to calm down, I want
action, a fight, attack! I am tired of
sitting and waiting." Akimoto was flushed,
breathing heavily, eyes bloodshot and not just from the
liquor. His huge fist pounded the tatami.
"And I am tired of you studying all night, your
head in a book, if you're not careful you will ruin
your eyes and ruin your sword arm and then you will be
dead. Attack, that is what we are here for--I
want sonno-joi now, not later!"
  "Without knowledge and patience ... how many times do I
have to tell you? You become like Ori, or that fool
Shorin, why be so anxious to put your head in the
Enforcer's garrote?"'
  "I'm not and ... Eeee, Hiraga, you're
right, please excuse me but ..." The words had
trailed off and he saw him swallow more sak`e.
  "What is really troubling you? The
truth."
  Akimoto hesitated. "I heard from my
father." He began haltingly but soon the words were
pouring out. "A letter came through the mama-san at
Kanagawa ... there's famine in the village,
in the whole area, your family is hurting too,
so sorry to tell you. Two of my little cousins have
died. Three of my uncles gave up samurai
class and their swords--they sold them as part
payment for debts to the moneylender, swords that were
used in Sekigahara--to become fishermen, at
least they are working the nets for boat owners, dawn
to dusk, to get a few cash! Tomiko, she an
aunt's widowed daughter who was living with us, she
had to sell her little girl to a child broker. She was
given enough to feed the rest of her family for half a
year--her two sons and her invalid father. A
week later she left the money in a teapot for
my mother to find and threw herself off the cliff. Her
note said her heart was broken having to sell her
own child but the money could help the family and not be
wasted on another useless mouth ..."
  The tears were pouring down his cheeks but no sound
of weeping was in his voice, only anger, "Such
a nice girl, such a good wife to my friend,
Murai--remember him, one of our Choshu ronin
who died in the attack on Tair@o Ii? I
tell you, Cousin, it is awful to be samurai
when you have no face, no stipend, nowhere to go and
to be ronin is worse. Even so, me ... you're
right again ... I think we will have to imitate stinking
gai-jin if we want warships, even I know they
do not grow in a rice paddy, and must find ways
to make stinking money and be like stinking rice-dealing
moneylenders. Stinking money, stinking gai-jin,
st--"'
  "Stop it," he had said sharply, and handed him
another flask, "You are alive, you are working for
sonno-joi, tomorrow you go on a warship to learn, that
is enough, Cousin."
  Numb, Akimoto shook his head, wiping the
tears away.
  "Was there any other news? Of my father, my
family?"'
  "Well ... read for yourself."
  He read: If Hiraga is with you tell
him his family are in sad straights, his mother is
sick, they have no money and no more credit. If
he has any means to send any, or arrange
any credit, it will save lives--of
course his father will never ask. Tell him also his
wife-to-be had not yet arrived and his father fears
for her safety.
  Nothing I can do for them, Hiraga thought, nearing
their village hideaway, again in misery. The
night wind picked up, rustling the thatched roofs,
and colder than before. Nothing I can do. Stinking
money! Akimoto is right. We should put
Ori's plan into effect. A night like this would be
ideal. Two or three huts torched and the wind
would jump the flames from house to house and whip it
into a conflagration. Why not tonight? Then the stinking
gai-jin would have to go back aboard their ships and
sail away. Would they? Or am I deluding
myself and it is our karma to be eaten up by them.
  What to do?
  Katsumata always said, When in doubt act!
  Sumomo? On the way to Yedo? His pulse
quickened but even the thought of her did not remove the
remorse for his family. We should marry now,
marry here, while there is time, impossible to go
home, the journey would take months and it is
vital to be here, father will understand.
  Will he? Is it vital, or am I just
deluding myself? And why did Katsumata put
Sumomo with Yoshi? He would not risk her for
nothing.
  Nothing! I am nothing. From nothing into nothing,
famine again and no money and no credit and no way
to help. Without sonno-joi there's nothing we can
do--
  All at once it was as if a skin covering part
of his mind had shed and he remembered Jamie
explaining some aspects of gai-jin business that
had shocked him. In moments he was again tapping on
the shoya's door and sitting opposite him.
  "Shoya, I thought I should mention, so you can
prepare, I believe I have persuaded the
gai-jin business expert to meet you in his great
mansion, the day after tomorrow in the morning, to answer
questions. I will interpret for you." The shoya thanked
him and had bowed to cover his sudden beam.
  Hiraga continued blandly, "Jami Mukfey
told me it was gai-jin custom that there would be a
fee, for this and all the other information he has already
given you. The equivalent of ten koku." He
uttered the staggering sum as though it was a pittance and
saw the shoya blanch but not explode as he had
expected, telling such a lie.
  "Impossible," the shoya said, his
voice strangled.
  "I told him so but he said as a businessman
and banker you would understand how valuable his information
was, and that he would even consider ..." Again
Hiraga controlled himself, "... would even help
the shoya to begin a business, first of its kind, in the
gai-jin fashion to deal with other countries."
  Again this was not altogether a lie. McFay had told
him that he would be interested in meeting and talking to a
Japanese banker--Hiraga had inflated the
shoya's importance and position in the
Gyokoyama--that more or less any day at a
day's notice would suit him, and that there were all
kinds of opportunities for cooperation.
  He watched the shoya, exhilarated at his
transparency, clearly besieged by potential
opportunities to use Mukfey's knowledge for
profit, and being the first to do such a business: "Very
important to be first," Mukfey had
explained, "your Japanese friend will understand that if
he's any sort of businessman. Easy for me
to supply our business skills, easy for your
Japanese friend to do the same with Japanese
skills and knowledge." It had taken Hiraga a
blinding effort to understand what the man had been
talking about.
  He allowed the shoya to dream and to worry.
"Though I do not understand business matters, shoya,
I might be able to reduce that price."
  "Oh if you could do that, Otami-sama, you would
please a poor old man, just a modest servant
to the Gyokoyama, for I would have to beg their
permission to pay anything."
  "Perhaps I could bring it down to three koku."
  "Half a koku would perhaps be possible."
  Hiraga cursed himself. He had forgotten the
Mukfey Golden Rule One, as he called
it: "When negotiating be patient. You can always
come down but never go back up, and never be afraid
to laugh or cry or scream or pretend
to leave."
  "Asking ten, I doubt if Mukfey would
reduce below three."
  "A half is already very high."
  If he had had a sword he would have gripped
the hilt and snarled, "Three or I will have your
dirty head." Instead he nodded sadly.
"Yes, you are right." He began to get up.
  "Perhaps my masters would agree one."
  Now he was almost at the door. "So
sorry, shoya, I would lose face to try
to bargain so cheaply an--"
  "Three." The shoya was flushed.
  Hiraga sat down again. It took him a little
while to adjust to the new world. He said, "I will
try to make it three. These are hard times. I have
just heard there is famine in my village in
Choshu. Terrible, neh?"
  He saw the shoya's eyes narrow. "Yes,
Otami-sama. Soon there will be famine everywhere,
even here."
  Hiraga nodded. "Yes," he said and waited,
allowing the silence to thicken. Mukfey had
explained the value of silence in negotiating, that
a closed mouth at the right time unnerves your
opponent--for negotiation is a fight like any
other--and snares concessions you would never dream of
asking.
  The shoya knew he was trapped but had not
decided on the extent of the trap, nor the price
he would pay. Thus far the information he had been
given was worth ten times that amount. But be
cautious ... this man is dangerous, this
Hiraga Otami-sama learns too fast, he
may or may not be telling the truth, may or
may not be a liar. Even so, better to have a
cunning samurai with you than against you. "In bad
times, friends should help friends. It might be that the
Gyokoyama could arrange a little credit to help.
As I mentioned before, Otami-sama, your father and
family are respected and valued clients."
  Hiraga bit back the angry words he would
normally have spat out at being so openly
patronized. "That would be too much to expect,"
he said, feeling his way in this new world of profit
and loss--one person's profit is another's
loss, Mukfey had explained many times.
"Anything the great Gyokoyama could do would be
appreciated. But speed is very important, could
I be assured they would understand? Yes?"
  "It would be at once. I will arrange it."
  "Thank you, and perhaps they would consider along with a
substantial credit, perhaps also an outright
grant, a fee, of say one koku ..." He
saw the eyes flash with anger, quickly hidden and
wondered if he had gone too far, "... for
services rendered by the family."
  Another silence. Then the shoya said, "In the
past ... and in the future."
  Hiraga's eyes became as cold
as the shoya's though, like him, his mouth smiled. And,
still in the new world, did not take out the small
revolver he always carried now and blow a hole in
him for his rudeness. "Of course." Then he added
sweetly, "Until the day after tomorrow, neh?"
  The shoya nodded and bowed. "Until then,
Otami-sama."
  Once more outside and hidden by the night,
Hiraga allowed his triumph to soar with his soul.
One whole koku and credits and now how
to exchange the three koku that the Mukfey
gai-jin had not asked for, nor needed, into real
rice, or real money, that he also could send to his
father?
  So much for so little, he thought, elated, and, at the
same time feeling soiled, in need of a bath.

  "Ah, Admiral," Malcolm Struan said,
"a private word?"
  "Certainly, sir." Admiral Ketterer
clambered to his feet, one of the twenty guests still
at the table in the Struan great room, grouped
around their port that Angelique had left them
to. Ketterer was in evening uniform, breeches,
white silk stockings and silver-buckled shoes,
more florid than usual having enjoyed a
mulligatawny soup, barbecued fish, a double
helping of the roast beef and Yorkshire pudding with
potatoes roasted in the dripping and vegetables
imported from California, chicken and pheasant
pie, a few fried pork sausages, followed
by Californian dried apple pie with a lavish
portion of the now famous Noble House cream, and
to top everything off, a Welsh rarebit savory.
Champagne, sherry, claret--a Ch`ateau
Lafite 1837, the year Queen Victoria
came to the Throne--port and Madeira. "I could
use a breath of air," Ketterer said.
  Malcolm led the way to the side French
doors, the good food and wine dulling the pain.
Outside it was brisk, but after the stuffy inside
refreshing. "Cigar?"
  "Thank you."
  Number One Boy Chen was hovering in the
background with the box. After the cigars were lit he
vanished in the smoke.
  "You saw my letter in today's Guardian,
sir?"
  "Yes, yes I did, much of it well put,"
Ketterer said.
  Malcolm smiled. "If the hornet's nest
of protests it stirred at the meeting this afternoon is
any indication it put your point over rather well."
  "My point? Damme, I do hope it's yours
as well."
  "Yes of course, of course. Tomorrow--"
  Ketterer interrupted sharply, "I was rather
hoping, since you share a perfectly correct and
moral position, a man of your undoubted power and
influence would, at the very least, have formally led the way
and outlawed all contraband, on all Struan
ships, and have done with it."
  "All contraband is already proscribed,
Admiral," Malcolm said. ""Slowly
slowly catchee monkey," is the way to go. In
a month or two we'll be in the majority."
  The Admiral just raised his thick eyebrows and
puffed his cigar and turned his attention to the sea.
The fleet looked grand under riding lights.
"Looks as though there could be a storm tonight, or
tomorrow. Not the sort of weather for a joy ride, for a
lady, I would think."
  Anxiously Malcolm looked up the sky and
sniffed the wind. No danger signs. As tomorrow's
weather was a major concern he had gone to great
lengths to check it. To his joy, as for the last few
days the forecast had been for smooth seas and fair
wind. Marlowe had confirmed it before dinner, and although
he did not yet have final sailing approval--or
was party to the real reason for Malcolm's need
to be aboard with Angelique--as far as he was
concerned their trip was on.
  "Is that your forecast, Admiral?" Malcolm
asked.
  "My weather expert, Mr. Struan. He
advised cancelling any trials tomorrow. Better
to spend the time preparing to stand off Yedo. Eh?"
Ketterer added with thin joviality.
  "I'm against flattening Yedo," Malcolm said
absently, his mind on this new and unexpected
problem--the Admiral's snide refusal
to accept his letter that he had been confident would be more
than sufficient.
  Everything's perfect except for this bugger, he
thought, curbing his anger, trying to think of a way out
of the dilemma. Prancing Cloud had arrived
on schedule and was in the roads off-loading cargo,
Captain Strongbow already apprised of the new
secret orders for Wednesday's new departure
time, and Edward Gornt equally primed
to pass over the Brock information as soon as the
duel was over.
  "I'm also opposed," the Admiral was saying.
"We've no formal orders for war. I'm
curious what your reasons are."
  "Using a hammer to kill a hornet is not
only foolish but can give you piles."
  Ketterer laughed. "Damme, that's a good one,
Struan. Piles, eh? More of your China-man
philosophy, eh?"
  "No, sir. Dickens." He eased his back
and leaned again on his sticks. "It would please me,
sir, and Angelique, to be aboard Pearl, with
Captain Marlowe, and out of sight of land tomorrow, for a
short time." Heavenly had advised that as the
precedent he was using, the marriage of
Malcolm's parents, took place between Macao
and Hong Kong out of sight of land, for safety he
should do the same. "With your blessing of course."
  "It would please me to see the Noble House
take the lead in the Japans. Clearly you
don't have enough time. I suggest ten days would be enough for
practical steps. I believe Pearl and
Marlowe are needed for fleet matters tomorrow."
Ketterer turned to go.
  "Wait," Malcolm said, panic rising,
"say I make an announcement right now,
to everyone here, that we're, that we're stopping all
arms shipments into Japan from now on. Would that
satisfy you?"
  "The point is would it satisfy you?" the
Admiral said, enjoying seeing the man who
represented everything he despised wriggling on the
barb. "Would it?"
  "What ... what is it, sir, that I can do,
or say?"
  "It's not up to me to run your "business.""
The way Ketterer used the word, laced with scorn,
made it a dirty word. "It would seem to me
what's good for the Japans is good for China. If
you outlaw guns here, why not do the same in China
for all your ships--the same with opium?"
  "I can't do that," Malcolm said. "It would
put us out of business, opium's not against the law
and both are legal--"
  "Interesting." Again the word was heavy with sarcasm.
"I really must thank you for a fine dinner, as
usual, Mr. Struan. If you'll excuse
me, I have lots to do tomorrow."
  "Wait!" Malcolm said shakily.
"Please, please help me, tomorrow's terribly
important to me, I swear I'll support you
in everything, I'll lead the way but please help
me about tomorrow. Please."
  Admiral Ketterer pursed his lips, ready
to terminate this pointless conversation. That's what it
is, though there's no doubt I could use support
amongst these rotten bastards, if even a tenth of the
slanders rumored at their bloody meeting are
true. I suppose this one isn't so bad, if
he could be trusted--compared to the others, compared to that
monster Greyforth. "When's your duel?"
  Malcolm was going to answer truthfully but
stopped himself. "I'll answer that if you like, sir,
and I remember what you said about duelling, but in
matters of honor my family have been very serious
for at least two generations and I don't want
to be lacking. It's a tradition, like the Navy
I suppose. Much of the magic of the Royal
Navy has to do with that, tradition and honor,
doesn't it?"
  "Without it the Royal Navy would not be the
Royal Navy." Ketterer took another deep
puff of the cigar. At least the young bugger understands,
by God, though that doesn't tip the scales. The
truth is the poor fool's mother is quite right
to disapprove the marriage--the girl's pretty enough
but hardly the right choice, bad blood line,
typically French. I'm doing him a favor.
  Are you?
  Remember Consuela di Mardos Perez of
C@adiz?
  He had first met her when he was a midshipman
in Royal Sovereign during courtesy
calls at the port. Ultimately the
Admiralty had refused him permission to marry,
his father had been equally opposed and when, at
length, he had won both their consents and rushed
back to claim her, she was already betrothed. She was
Catholic too, he thought sadly, still loving her
after all this time.
  Catholic, that sent everyone mad, like
Struan's mother I'll wager. As if it
matters, though Consuela's family was good where this
girl's isn't. Yes, I still love her. After
her, no one. Never wanted to marry, not after losing
her, somehow couldn't. Still, that let me put everything
into the Navy so life hasn't been a total
sodding loss.
  Has it?
  "I'm going to have another port," he said. "That
will take ten to fifteen minutes. What can you do
to lead the way in ten or fifteen minutes, eh?"

                 

  Gornt hurried down the steps of Struan's
into the night, following other guests leaving the party
in animated conversation, bundled up and holding their
hats against the wind. Servants were waiting with
lamps to guide some of them home. After a
polite but hasty good night, he went next
door to Brock's. The guard, a tall
turbanned Sikh, saluted, stared at him as he
rushed up the stairs two at a time to knock on
Norbert Greyforth's door.
  "Who is it?"
  "Me, suh, Edward. Sorry, it's
important."
  There was a sour grumble. Then the bolt jerked
back. Norbert's hair was tousled. He wore
a nightshirt, nightcap and bed socks. "What
the hell is it?"
  "Struan. He's just announced from here on
he's committing the Noble House to embargo all
guns and all opium in Japan and ordering the
same in all Asia and the China trade."
  "What's this, a joke?"
  "No joke, Mr. Greyforth, suh. It was
at the party--that's what he said in front of
everyone a moment ago, Sir William, most
of the Foreign Ambassadors, the Admiral,
Dmitri--Struan's exact words, suh: "I
want to make a formal statement. Following my
Guardian letter today, I've decided no guns
or opium will be carried by our ships or traded
by Struan's from now on, here or in China.""
  Norbert began to laugh, "Come in, this calls
for a celebration. He's put Struan's out of
business. And made us Noble House." He
stuck his head into the corridor and shouted for his
Number One Boy. "Lee! Champagne, chop
chop! Come in, Edward and close the door, it's
drafty and cold enough to freeze the balls off a
brass monkey." He turned up the oil
lamp. His bedroom was large with a vast
four-poster, the floor carpeted, oils on the
walls of Brock clipper ships--their fleet
smaller than Struan's but their steamer fleet
almost twice as large. Some of the
paintings were fire damaged and the ceiling, too, was
not yet completely repaired. Books piled on
the side tables and another opened on the bed.
  "The poor bastard's really gone." Norbert
chuckled. "First thing we do is to cancel the duel,
got to keep him alive. Now this is wh--" His
smile vanished. "Wait a minute, what am
I talking about? It's all a storm in a
pisspot, he's no more tai-pan of Struan's
than I am. You're the fool, whatever he says
means nothing and much as his Bible-thumping mother would like
to do the same, she'd never agree, couldn't, it'd
ruin them."
  Gornt smiled. "I disagree."
  Norbert glanced at him sharply. "Eh?"
  "She'll agree."
  "Oh? Why?"
  "Secret."
  "What sort of secret?" Norbert glanced
at the door as it opened. Lee, an elderly
Cantonese with a long, thick queue, wearing
neat livery--white jacket, black trousers--
waddled in with glasses, champagne in an ice
bucket, a neat towel over his arm. In moments
two glasses were served. When the door had
closed, Norbert raised his glass. "Health,
and death to all Struans. What secret?"
  "You told me to try to befriend him. I have. Now
he confides in me. First--"
  "He does?"
  "Up to a point but it's better every day. First,
about tonight. The reason he wrote the letter and made the
announcement was to curry favor with the Admiral,
secretly."
  "Eh?"
  "May I?" Gornt motioned at the
champagne.
  "Of course. Sit down and explain yourself."
  "He needs the Admiral's approval to get
aboard Pearl tomorrow, that's the re--"
  "What the hell are you talking about?"
  "I happened to overhear them, talking
privately--they went outside after dinner. I was
looking at some of his paintings nearby--I'd
noticed a couple of Aristotle Quances--and,
well their voices carried." Gornt related,
almost word for word, their conversation. "Ketterer ended
by saying, "Let's see what you can do in ten or
fifteen minutes.""
  "That was all? Nothing about what's
aboard or what's so important about Pearl?"
  "No suh."
  "Weird, that's weird. What could it be?"
  "I don't know. The whole evening was strange.
All during dinner I'd catch Struan glancing
at the Admiral from time to time, but never once did
he catch his eye. It was as though the Admiral
deliberately avoided him without being too
obvious. That's what prompted my curiosity,
suh."
  "Where was he sitting--the Admiral?"
  "Next to Angelique, place of honor on
her right, Sir William the other side, should have
been the other way around--another curiosity. I
was next to Marlowe, he was star-gazing at
Angelique and talking boring naval talk,
nothing about any trip tomorrow though I got the
impression from what Struan had said, it had been
planned for some time, pending the Admiral's
okay. After the Admiral left I brought the
conversation with Marlowe back to tomorrow but he just said,
"Might be doing some trials, old boy, if the
Old Man approves, why?"' I told him
I enjoyed ships and asked if I could come along,
he laughed and said he'd certainly arrange a
future trip, then he left too."
  "Nothing about Struan and the girl?"
  "No suh. He's all eyes for her though."
  "It's her tits." Norbert grunted. "When
Struan made the announcement what happened?"
  "First there was a silence, then pandemonium,
questions, some laughter, a few catcalls, Marlowe
and the other naval officers cheered, and a lot of
anger. McFay went white, Dmitri almost
spat, Sir William stared at Struan,
shaking his head as though the poor fellow was an
object of pity. I'd concentrated on
Ketterer. He made no sign one way or
another, said nothing to Struan other than,
"Interesting," got up at once, thanked him
for dinner and left. Struan tried to stop him,
started to ask him about tomorrow but the Admiral either
didn't hear him or pretended not to, and stalked
out, leaving Struan shaking. At the same time,
suh, everyone talking and no one listening, like in a
Chinese market, not a few furious and shouting at
Struan that he was insane, and how in the hell could
we carry on trade--you know, the obvious and the
truth."
  Norbert finished his glass.
Gornt began to pour for him but he shook his head,
"Don't like bubbly too much at night, makes
me fart. Pour me a Scotch--the bottle's
over there." It was on a sideboard, oak,
weatherbeaten, an old sea clock on it.
"What's aboard Pearl he'd want so much?"
  "I don't know."
  "What did Struan do after Ketterer left?"
  "He just sat down and took a large drink,
stared into space, absently said good night as people
began to drift off, paying no attention
to Angelique which again was unlike him. As to her,
she just watched wide-eyed, not the center of attention
for once, clearly not understanding what was going on so
I guess not in Struan's confidence either. I
thought I'd better give you the news so didn't
stay."
  "You said something about a secret? What's the
secret, eh? Why that old bitch, Tess
Struan will agree to commit business suicide?"
  "Because of Sir Morgan's plan, suh."
  "What?"
  "Sir Morgan." Gornt smiled
broadly. "Before we left Shanghai he told
me, privately, he and Mr. Brock had
planned and were in the middle of executing some
scheme to ruin Struan's and finish them for good.
He told me it revolves around Hawaiian
sugar, the Victoria Bank an--"
  "Eh?" Norbert stared at him, remembering
Sir Morgan had been specific that he had not
given Gornt details of the coup, and did not
want him to have them: "even though lad's t'be
trusted. Yes, an' there be no harm in letting
him mix in the poxy Struan circle to see what
he can spy out." "Morgan told you the
details? About the deal?"
  "No suh, at least he only told me what
I was to pass on to Struan as secretly as I
could."
  "Jesus Christ," Norbert said,
exasperated, "you'd better start from the beginning."
  "He said I wasn't to tell you about my part
until I'd accomplished it, until I'd done
what he told me to do. I have, I'm in
Malcolm Struan's confidence, so now I can
tell you." Gornt sipped his champagne. "Very
good wine, suh."
  "Get on with it!"
  "Sir Morgan told me to tell
Struan a series of stories--he said it was near
enough to the truth to hook Struan and through him the real
tai-pan, Tess Struan. Suh, I can almost
guarantee, the last of the Struan tai-pans is
firmly hooked." Quickly Gornt gave him the
substance of exactly what he had told
Malcolm Struan. Ending it, he laughed.
"I'm to give him "the secret details" after
the duel, en route to his ship."
  "What're you to tell him?"
  The older man listened carefully. Knowing the
real details, he was fascinated to hear more of
Morgan's craftiness. If Tess Struan
acted on this false information, it would certainly
buy Sir Morgan the extra few weeks he
wanted. "But Sir Morgan," Norbert had
said in Shanghai when the plan had been laid out,
"it's foolproof now, you don't need extra
time, I can do my part in Yokohama before
Christmas."
  "Yes, thee can, and will. But me an' Dad,
we likes to be safer than safe, Lad, and
extra time will make sure our necks be away from
any ropes and our arses out of prison."
  Norbert suppressed a shudder at the thought of
being caught. No rope, but prison for fraud
probably and Debtor's Prison a
certainty. Sir Morgan's a crafty bugger
all right, just like him to tell me one thing and Gornt
another. He's saved me one risk, killing
Struan. So it's England for me and five thousand
a year but I lose the cream, the manor house and
being rich. Better safe than sorry.
  Norbert sighed. I was looking forward to putting
a bullet into Malcolm and reaping the cream, he
thought, Old Man Brock's words etched in his
memory: "Norbert, there be cream in thy
retirement. Thy bonus be upped by five thousand
guineas a year if thee kills him, a thousand
bonus for a bad wounding, thee's beached if thee's
humbled."
  "Morgan's clever, the plan's foolproof,"
he said with a smile. To make sure, testing him,
added casually, "Isn't it?"
  "Suh?"
  "The small changes make all the difference,
don't they?" He was watching him carefully.
  "Sorry, suh, I don't know any
details--other than what I've told you and he
said to pass on to Struan."
  "I'll have another Scotch--help yourself
to wine," Norbert said, satisfied, then drank
in silence until he had thought everything through. "You
continue as if you haven't told me. Tomorrow I'll
cancel the duel. Can't afford to kill or put the
bugger out of action."
  "Yes, suh, that was my immediate thought too."
Gornt handed him Malcolm Struan's letter, the
equivalent of the one Norbert had signed. "He
gave me this for you, but I suggest you don't cancel
tomorrow, that might make him suspicious--and we
might find out what's so important about
Pearl, if he goes or if he doesn't."
  "All right Edward, good idea." Norbert
guffawed. "So Wednesday, young nipper
Struan's on his way to disaster, eh?"
  Gornt grinned. "On his merry way, suh.
Their Noble House is finished and ours begins."
  "Yes." The warmth of the Scotch mixed with the
warmth of the future. "Then you've decided to join
us?"
  "Yes, suh, if you approve. Sir
Morgan said you'd have to approve."
  "You keep this up and you're approved. Tonight was
a good night's work, tiptop. 'night."
  He bolted the door after him. Before he
climbed back into the high bed he used the chamber
pot and felt even better. His glass was on his
side table, perched on a pile of books and
magazines, still a quarter full. He settled
himself against the high pillows he favored and picked
up the half-opened book, City of the
Saints, Burton's account of a stay among the
mysterious, polygamous Mormons in Salt
Lake City, Utah, another first for this, the most
famous adventurer and explorer in the world, who
spoke thirty or more languages, and whose
exploits and idiosyncrasies were avidly
followed in minutest detail.
  He read a few paragraphs, then,
distracted, tossed it aside. It's not as good as
Pilgrimage to El-Medina and Mecca, he
thought, or about discovering Lake Tanganyika.
  Amongst all that Mormon snatch you'd think
Burton who openly favors polygamy, which
any fool knows is the right idea, would describe
his conquests, he's done it enough times in other books
to raise the old hackles. Some papers
reported he had a baker's dozen of 'em, all
at the same time, presented personally
by Brigham Young, head of their "Latter-day
Saints" Church and Governor of Utah. What
liars!
  But, my God, what a man--he's done more and
seen more than any Englishman alive, makes you
even prouder to be English. And with all the
freedom to go where he wants, live as he
wants, how he wants, what's he do but go
back to England and get married to a good
Englishwoman like any normal man. Of
course, he left after a month and now they say
he's somewhere in parts unknown, the Hindu Kush or
up in the secret land on Top of the World, living
with the snow giants ...
  He sipped more of the drink, and thought about
Gornt. That young bugger's not as smart as he
thinks. Anyone can work out what's aboard Pearl
and why. Ketterer can keep a secret, so can
Wee Willie but Michaelmas Tweet can't,
nor Heavenly when he's in his cups, so I'd
heard about Tess Struan's letters and that she's
boxed Wee Willie, blocked the Church,
blocked all ship captains, and through Ketterer the
Navy--'cepting she's no power over the Navy!
And aboard Pearl is Marlowe. Marlowe could
marry 'em--if Ketterer allows it.
  He chuckled.
  But Ketterer hates Struan's because they sold
cannon to the White Lotus pirates, like us, like
we've been selling cannon to any God-cursed
warlord who'll buy, and will continue to do the same
even if Struan's don't, and why not? They're
legal and always will be. Parliament needs armament
factories because armaments are great business and
all governments like war--because wars are great
business, and, most of all, because war covers up
their own sodding incompetence.
  To hell with governments.
  Ketterer hates Struan's. For all his
red-neck arrogance he's no fool, he would
want practical results for a favor. Those
he can't get--announcements from that young fool mean
nothing--so he's cat-and-mousing him. Maybe
he'll let Struan and his doxy go aboard,
maybe he won't, but either way Marlowe won't
be allowed to marry them--Ketterer wants Struan
to crawl. The sod would make me crawl too if
he'd a quarter of a chance and give me a hundred
lashes to boot.
  A large swallow of the fine whisky
put him into a better humor and he laughed. So
young Struan's stymied: no Pearl'-assisted
marriage and back to Hong Kong, with or without his
doxy, and into the sodding pit with his ma. Curious that
I've got to leave the bugger alive when I'd
planned to take the Old Man's cream: "...
but Norbert, don't thee be a telling Morgan,
he's agin any killing, he be wanting to see young
Struan in't shit, his ma too! Remember,
or I'll have thy guts for garters."
  Must I stop the duel? I'll think about that.
Careful. I need the extra bonus.
  Just like Morgan to give Gornt secret
instructions and keep me in the dark. What else
has he told Gornt he hasn't told me?
Never mind, Morgan's the clever one, with all of
his Old Man's nerves but smooth with it,
modern, no madness, and no risk--none of his
Dad's brutal, merciless obsessions.
Morgan's our real tai-pan, and he'll be the
tai-pan of the new Noble House. It's only
taken twenty years to crush Dirk's company, the
biggest that's ever been in Asia.
  Satisfied he finished his drink, turned down
the wick, and settled himself with a yawn. Sorry
I never saw the Old Man in his heyday, or the
tai-pan, old Green-eyed Devil himself, whom
only the devil winds of the Great Typhoon could
kill. Lucky that young fool inherited none of his
qualities.

       END OF VOLUME VIII



















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume IX of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 1807-2026




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

            BOOK THREE

                 

    Monday, 8th December: (continued)
  Now the last guest had gone. Only
Angelique, Jamie McFay, and Malcolm
remained. The embers in the huge inglenook
fireplace glowed as drafts came down the
chimney and went away. Silently Malcolm was
frowning at the fire, watching pictures in the
coals. She sat on the arm of his chair,
unsettled. McFay was leaning against the table.
"I'll say good night, Tai-pan," he said.
  Malcolm came out of his reverie. "Oh ...
Hang on a moment." He smiled up at
Angelique. "Sorry, Angel, I've a
few things to discuss with Jamie, do you mind?"
  "Of course not. 'night, Jamie." She
bent and kissed Struan affectionately. "Good
night, Malcolm, sleep well."
  "Good night, darling, we should leave early."
  "Yes ... but Malcolm, please can I
ask, what was all the shouting about? I didn't
understand, could you explain?"
  "It was jealousy. Nothing more."
  "Oh! Of course, how strong you were and how
modern! How right you are about guns and opium ...
oh la la, ch@eri, and wise. Thank you. Of
course." She kissed him again. "What time do we
leave in the morning? I'm so excited, the
voyage will be such a change superbe."
  "Just after dawn. I'll see you're awakened in
good time, but, but don't be surprised if ... if
there's a change of plan--Marlowe said the weather
might change."
  "But he swore the wind would drop and it would be
a grand day for a voyage."
  "I said, "might change," Angel." He
gave her a hug. "If not tomorrow the earliest
possible day, he promised."
  "I do hope it's tomorrow. Je t'aime,
ch@eri."
  "Je t'aime."
  When she was gone the silence in the room congealed.
Chen peered around the door again. Malcolm said,
"Close the bloody door and don't come
back." It closed with alacrity. Jamie began
to talk but he held up his hand.
"Don't say a thing about ships or cannon or
opium. Please."
  "Very well."
  "Sit down, Jamie." Malcolm had thought
all around the corners of the Admiral and devised
a plan for each of the various possibilities:
if the Admiral decided they could make the trip
with his blessing, or if they could make the trip but
Marlowe was forbidden to perform the ceremony, or if
the trip was postponed till sometime in the future.
For the moment he put countermeasures aside.
"Would you have our steam cutter alongside Pearl
just before dawn, the Bosun to find out from Marlowe if
our trip's on or not. If it is or if it
isn't, tell the Bosun to report to me here with the
answer. All right?"
  "Of course."
  "I wrote the letter for Norbert and gave it
to Gornt tonight, so that's done. Have I forgotten
anything?"
  "About Wednesday?"
  "Yes."
  "Nothing I know of. Routes and times you know
about, the pistols are standard, no doctors will be
present as both Babcott and Hoag are
considered unsafe. The letters are your only
defense. No witnesses except Gornt and
me."
  "Good. You're ready to leave with Prancing
Cloud?"
  "I'll send a valise aboard with our mails
tomorrow, no one should notice. What about your
trunks?"
  "I'm only taking one. Sneak it aboard tomorrow
--if anyone says anything it's some clothes
I'm sending on ahead, pending my move back
to Hong Kong for Christmas."
  "Chen will pack for you?"
  "He'll have to, I'll swear him to secrecy
but that'll only work with our society, not with the
Chinese. I'll have to take him with me. Ah
Tok's a problem but she can stay here pending our
"real move." I'll have to let Ah Soh
into the secret. She'll come with us to Hong Kong."
  "Angelique?"
  "No need to tell her. If we go aboard
Pearl, Ah Soh can pack a trunk of
clothes and send that aboard with the same excuse, after
nightfall tomorrow for safety. All right?"
  "Yes."
  "Wednesday morning we, you and I, will sneak out
the back way as planned. A little later Chen,
Ah Soh and Angelique, well cloaked, will
go across the road to our wharf where you'll have the steam
cutter waiting to take them to the clipper--"
  "Excuse me butting in but if this is the final
plan, better to use an oared cutter, less
noise. For safety, the steam cutter should be
waiting for us at Drunk Town wharf."
  "That's better, Jamie. Thank you. An
oared cutter then. After dealing with Norbert, we
get aboard as fast as we can. Tomorrow tell
Vargas to organize a meeting with our
Japanese silk dealers for Friday, make it
look as if we've a heavy schedule for the rest of
this week and next, all right?"
  "Yes."
  "Anything else, Jamie?"
  "May I make a suggestion?"
  "Of course."
  "After tomorrow's trip in Pearl ..." McFay
hesitated. "You said there might be a change of
plan--because of weather? Weather's forecast as good,
isn't it?"
  "Yes. That was just in case Marlowe has to stay
in port," he said easily. "With all the fleet
preparations to savage Yedo, or threaten it, you
never know what Ketterer or Sir William
might decide. What's your suggestion,
Jamie?"
  "Actually I've a couple. After you come
back tomorrow--Marlowe said you'd be back by sunset
--why don't you and Angelique go aboard
Prancing Cloud for dinner with Captain
Strongbow, even stay aboard overnight. At
dawn you and I could come ashore an--"
  "That's a much better plan," Struan said at
once, jumping ahead with a beam, "much better.
Then Angelique's already aboard, so's her
luggage, so we don't have to worry about her, and
after Norbert we can come straight back. Great
thinking, Jamie. Our stuff can be sent aboard with
Chen and Ah Soh, no reason why they shouldn't
stay aboard too, no one should suspect
anything." His smile was fine and genuine. "You're
very clever to think of that, you're very clever, which is why
I don't want you to leave Struan's."
  Jamie smiled ruefully. "We'll see."
  "By the way, in case there's an accident,"
Malcolm said calmly, eyes level
and without fear. "If I'm wounded but mobile enough
to get aboard, that's what I want to do. If
there's a real emergency, well, just fetch either
Babcott or Hoag. Plan to bring Hoag
aboard anyway, we'll take him back to Hong
Kong."
  "I checked their Kanagawa clinic but that's
on Thursday so they'll both be here."
  "You think of everything."
  "No. Wish I could, and wish you'd cancel the
duel."
  "There won't be any accident."
  "I pray you're right. But whatever happens
it's better that I stay here until you get
back, or you send for me."
  "But Mother said in her letter th--"
  "I know. Let's be honest, Tai-pan.
I'm out, one way or another. It's best I'm
here to cover your tail, if Norbert's all right
or if he isn't, and to keep an eye on
Gornt. Sorry I still don't trust that
fellow. My job's here not in Hong Kong. In
the spring I'll quit. That's best, and we should
agree it now--but not before your twenty-first."
  The two men looked at each other, eyes
locked. Both broke off sharply as coals
fell onto the hearth. The coals flickered and
died without danger. "You're a wonderful friend,"
Malcolm said quietly. "Truly."
  "No, just trying to keep my oath--to the
tai-pan of the Noble House."

  Andr`e and Phillip Tyrer were outside the
British Legation. "Malcolm's idea of an
embargo, however moral, would be a disaster for every
trading company in Asia," Tyrer said,
"including yours, not that you'd follow suit or the
Germans or Russians or Yanks." The
wind ruffled his hair but he was not cold, with all
the alcohol he had consumed and the excitement.
"Sir William doubts if the Governor in
Hong Kong will approve, could approve whatever
Parliament orders, he'd prevaricate, not that
I can officially speak for either of them.
Parliament's a law unto itself," he added with a
yawn. "I'm beat, aren't you?"
  "I have a date."
  "Ah!" Tyrer had seen the flash of
expectation. "Lucky man! You've certainly
seemed a lot happier recently, a
very lot happier. We were all quite worried."
  Andr`e changed to French and dropped his voice.
"I'm fine now, the best I've ever been. Can't
tell you how happy I am and the girl, well,
she treats me like a king--best I've ever had.
No more wandering for me. I have an exclusive."
  "Wonderful."
  "Listen, talking of that, what about Fujiko?
Raiko's getting nervous and so is she. I hear
the poor girl's crushed, cries all the time."
  "Oh?" Tyrer felt a shaft in his loins.
"Then your advice was right," he said, hardly
noticing that he replied in French--most of the
evening he had been speaking to Seratard,
Zergeyev and other ministers, English intermingled
with French.
  "I'd say you've been tough enough and it's time.
No point in hurting anyone, they're nice people.
They're both sorry for irritating you."
  A few nights ago Raiko had intercepted
him and again asked if he had his overdue payment.
After he had put her off with the promise that he was
expecting funds any day--gambling that
Angelique would find the money--Raiko had
questioned him about Tyrer. "What's wrong with the man?
It would be a service to him, to me, to Fujiko, and
to you, old friend, to correct whatever needs to be
corrected. Obviously he's been seduced by the
whores at the Inn of the Lily. In these bad times
it would help us, and you, if you would convince him
to return. The poor girl is near
suicide."
  He had not believed that but Raiko had been
ready to twist the knife called Hinodeh.
  "Phillip, you've played the game
perfectly," he said. "I'll arrange a
rendezvous and we'll reopen negotiations."
  "Well, Andr`e, I don't know about that,"
Tyrer said. "I, er, I must say I did try
another girl, once--the Inn you recommended is
not bad at all--and I've been thinking perhaps
having a permanent girl is not a good idea. I
mean it's a large expense and well, I need a
polo pony ..."
  "There are good points and bad points to having
your own girl," Andr`e said, hiding his angst.
"Perhaps the best idea would be to shelve contract
talks pending "an improvement in relations.""
  "You mean have your cake and eat it?"
  "Why not? They're all there for our
pleasure, aren't they--though Fujiko and Raiko
are very special." Andr`e was persuasive, not
wanting Tyrer off the Fujiko hook any more
than he wanted to be on Raiko's. To be
secret partners with her was one thing. To be at her
mercy was another. He would make the date, the
rest would be up to them to seduce Tyrer back
to his previous state of passion. "Leave them
to me. How about tomorrow? I can promise your
welcome will be enthusiastic."
  "Oh, really? Well, all right."
  "Phillip ..." Andr`e glanced around again.
"Henri is more than anxious to support Sir
William in moves to rap this fool Tair@o
Anjo severely--the cretin went too far this
time. Could Sir William have a private
discussion tomorrow? Henri has a few ideas he would
like to pass on, privately."
  "I'm sure he would." Tyrer was at once
attentive and pleasantly surprised, his
tiredness leaving him. Usually Seratard would
launch a French initiative and they would only
hear of it when it was in full force. Like the secret
invitation to Lord Yoshi to visit the French
flagship that they had just heard about through their own
sources--Chinese servants in the French
Legation had overheard Andr`e and Seratard
planning, they had passed it on to Number One
Chen, who had told Struan who had told him
who had told Sir William. "A council of
war? The two of them?"
  Andr`e said, "I suggest the four of us--they'll
need assistants to put their ideas into motion, but the
fewer involved the better. If later they wanted
to bring in the Admiral and General, all right. But
later, eh?"
  "An Entente Cordiale! I'll take it
up with the Old Man first thing in the morning. How
about eleven?"
  "Could we make it ten? I must keep a noon
appointment." Andr`e had already cleared the idea with
Seratard the moment he had returned from seeing
Raiko: "Henri, this meeting could be very
important, the more secret we keep it from other
Ministers the better. This time we've got
to pretend to be a hundred percent with the British.
They have the warships, we haven't. This time we must
encourage them to go to war."
  "Why?"'
  "I gather from Tyrer who gets it
from his tame samurai Nakama--Henri,
Tyrer's Japanese is astonishingly good for the
short time he's been here. He has a remarkable
aptitude for it so we should seriously watch him,
and befriend him. Tyrer has found out that there's no
love lost between this Anjo and Toranaga Yoshi,
who is a patrician like you, whereas Anjo is more
of a commoner."
  It had amused him to see Seratard puff up
at the flattery--no more a patrician than he
was himself. "We secretly encourage the
British to smash Anjo while distancing ourselves
at the last moment from the actual conflict, while
cultivating Yoshi as urgent, secret national
policy. We make him an ally, we must, then
through him we'll dump the British back in their
sewer and control the foreign presence here."
  "How do we do that, Andr`e? Cultivate
him?"'
  "Leave that to me," he had said, gambling again
that, through Raiko and by providing her with first-rate
intelligence, and money, he could make the right
contacts to get close to Yoshi. "He's going
to be our key to unlock Japan. We'll have
to invest some money, not much. But, in the right pocket
..." with a little wandering into mine, he had chortled,
"I'll guarantee success. He's going to be
our Knight in Shining Armor. We're going
to help him become Sir Galahad to wreck
Wee Willie's King Arthur."
  Why not, he told himself again, standing there on the
promenade with Tyrer, another key piece on the
chessboard of French dominance in Asia.
Phillip will ...
  My God! He almost burst out as the wild
idea jumped into his mind: If Struan gets
killed in his duel and Angelique becomes a
free card, could she become a Guinevere for this
Jappo Yoshi? Why not? He might enjoy a
different tidbit. Through Raiko, perhaps
Angelique would--for she would be perilously without
funds and therefore vulnerable.
  He laughed and put the thought aside as too
heady to consider seriously tonight. "Phillip," he
said, wanting him to consider him to be his best friend.
"If we can help our masters to arrive at a
firm solution and put it into effect ... eh?"
  "That would be marvelous, Andr`e!"
  "One day you'll be Ambassador here."
  Tyrer laughed. "Don't be
silly."
  "I'm not." In spite of the fact they would always
be on opposite sides and he needed to be able
to influence him, he genuinely liked Tyrer.
"In a year you'll speak and write fluent
Japanese, you're trusted by Wee Willie,
you've your wild card, Nakama, to assist you.
Why not?"
  "Why not?" Tyrer said with a grin. "It's a
nice idea to end a night on. Happy dreams,
Andr`e."

  Almost no one in the Settlement was sleeping as
contentedly as Angelique--Struan's
bombshell tonight, coupled with anxiety over the coming
war here and in Europe and the resultant hazards
for business, kept most awake: "As if there's
not enough to worry about with our own civil war,"
Dmitri muttered to his pillow in the deep
darkness of his room in the Cooper-Tillman
Building. News from home was getting worse and
worse, whichever side you supported and he had
family on both sides.
  Dreadful numbers of casualties on both
sides, looting and burning and atrocities and
mutinies and brutalities and corruptions and
monstrous tragedies, on both sides. An
uncle had written from Maryland that whole towns were
being burned and pillaged by Quantrill's
Raiders for the South and the Jayhawkers for the
North, and that, by now, most important men in the
North had legally bought themselves and their sons out of the
army draft: The war's being fought by the poor, the
undernourished, the ill-equipped and the half starving.
This is the end of our country, Dmitri ...
  His father wrote from Richmond the same:
There'll be nothing left if this goes on
another year. Nothing. Terrible to tell you, my
darling son, your brother Janny was killed at the
second battle at Bull Run, poor lad,
our cavalry was decimated, carnage ...
  Dmitri twisted and turned in his bed, striving
to put the pain for his nation away from him but could not.

  In the Club a noisy, drunken row was still in
progress amongst the few remaining traders at
the bar. A few naval and army officers,
Tweet and others were at tables scattered about the
room, having final nightcaps.
  Near the window, Count Zergeyev
and the newly arrived Swiss Minister, Fritz
Erlicher, sat at a table. The Russian hid
his amusement and leaned over their glasses of
port. "They're all fools, Herr Erlicher,"
he said above the hubbub.
  "Do you think this young Struan means it?"
  "He means it, but whether or not the policy is
ever implemented, remains to be seen." They
spoke French, and Zergeyev explained the
conflict of mother and son within Struan's. "That's the
current rumor, she pulls the strings though he
has the title quite legally."
  "If it's implemented it would be good, for us
both."
  "Ah! You have a proposal?"
  "An idea, Count Zergeyev." Erlicher
untied his cravat and breathed easier, the air in
the Club smoky and close, the smell of beer and
urine heavy, and the sawdust of the floor in need of
replacement. "We are a small, independent
nation with few resources but plenty of courage, and
skills. The British, for whom you have no love,
monopolize most arms manufacturing and sales
throughout Europe--though Krupp's factory
looks promising." The bearded, heavyset man
smiled. "We hear Mother Russia already has a
substantial interest there."
  "You astonish me."
  Erlicher laughed. "I astonish myself sometimes,
Herr Count. But I wanted to mention we've the
beginnings of fine gun and cannon foundries,
privately I can tell you we are negotiating
with Gatling to make his machine gun under license,
and can supply you liberally with any arms you might
need on a long-term basis."
  "Thank you, my dear sir, but we've no such
need. Tsar Alexander II is a peace-loving
reformer, last year he emancipated our serfs,
this year he's reforming the army, navy,
bureaucracy, the judiciary, education, everything."
  Erlicher grinned. "And meanwhile he's
presiding over the biggest land conquest in history,
with the subjugation of more peoples in history,
except for Genghis Khan and his Mongol
hordes. Genghis rode westwards," his smile
became a beam, "while your Tsar's hordes
spread eastwards. Over the whole continent!
Imagine that! Over the whole continent to the sea,
through Siberia to the Kamchatka Peninsula. And
that's not the end. Is it?"
  "Isn't it?" the Count said, smiling.
  "We hear the Tsar's hoping to pass through your
new fortress of Vladivostok to the Japans,
then north to the Kuriles, north again to the
Aleutians, at last to join with Russian
Alaska that rolls down to northern California.
While the world sleeps. Astonishing." Erlicher
brought out his cigar case and offered it. "Please--
they're the best Cuban."
  Zergeyev took one and smelt it and rolled it
between his fingers, and accepted a flame. "Thank you.
Excellent. Are all the Swiss dreamers like
you?" he asked pleasantly.
  "No, sir Count. But we are peace lovers,
and good hosts to peace lovers, but we stay in our
mountains, well armed and watch the world outside.
Happily our mountains are prickly to those who
come uninvited."
  Another burst of shouting distracted them for a
moment, Lunkchurch, Swann, Grimm and others
more vociferous than usual.
  "I've never been to Switzerland. You should see
Russia, we have many sights there to feast the eye."
  "I've been to your beautiful St.
Petersburg. Three years ago, I was in our
Embassy there for a few months. Best city in
Europe I think, if you are nobility,
wealthy, or a foreign diplomat. You must miss
it."
  "I bleed for it, more than you can imagine."
Zergeyev sighed. "Not long now and I'll be
there. I'm told my next posting will be London
--then I will visit your mountains."
  "I would be honored to be your host." Erlicher
puffed his cigar and blew a smoke ring. "Then my
business suggestion doesn't interest you?"
  "It's certainly true that the British
monopolize all manner of enterprises, all
sea routes and seas, all manner of wealths from
subjugated lands ..." Now there was no warmth in
Zergeyev's smile. "... which should be shared."
  "Then we should talk again, in quieter
surroundings?"
  "Over lunch, why not? I would certainly inform
my superiors of any discussion. If there is ever
a future need, where should I contact you, or your
superiors?"
  "Here is my card. If you ask for me in
Zurich, I'm easily found." Erlicher watched
him reading the superb calligraphy of the
miraculous new printing process they had just
developed. Count Zergeyev had elegant
features, patrician in every pore, with perfect
clothes where he knew his own were mediocre and that his
forebearers were peasants. But he did not envy him.
  I'm Swiss, he was thinking. I'm free.
I don't have to bow a knee or doff my cap
to any king or Tsar or priest or man--if I
don't want to. This poor fellow's still a serf
in a way. Thank God for my mountains and my
valleys, and my brothers and sisters and living
amongst them, all free as I am free and will
remain free.
  Near the bar, half drunk and swaying,
Lunkchurch was comically squaring off against another
man, shouting at the top of his voice, "That there
effing Struan's blown his effing rocker wot ever
way you effing want and no effing ..."
  "For goodness' sake, Barnaby, stop your foul
language," the Reverend Tweet shouted, pushing
through the crush for the door, his collar slightly
askew and his face flushed and sweating. "When you
think about it from a fair, English point of view
you have to agree morally young Struan has the right
approach!"
  Lunkchurch drunkenly made a very rude
gesture in his face, "Stuff your effing
santimonio effing doodle do!"
  Purple with rage, the Reverend Tweet
bunched his fist and threw an ineffectual blow.
Those near Lunkchurch jerked him out of the way as
usual, as others surrounded Tweet and soothed his
soaring tirade, and then Charlie Grimm, always
ready to take up the gauntlet, any
gauntlet, roared above the noise and through his own
sodden haze, "Barnaby, prepare to meet thy
Maker!"
  Helpfully, those nearby gave them room and,
to cheers, the two men began battering each other with
abandon.
  "Drinks on the 'ouse," the chief barman
ordered for those still remaining. "Scotch for the Rev,
port for the Count and 'is guest. Now you two,
stop fighting!"
  Tweet accepted the drink and tottered to a table
well away from the fighters who were now rolling on
the floor, their belligerence undiminished. The
barman sighed, emptied a bucket of slops
over them, walked around the bar, picked up one in
each hand and to more cheers, cast them
into High Street. "Gents, it's time gents
please!" he said to howls that were quickly muted.
Everyone finished their drinks and began to leave.
Zergeyev and Fritz Erlicher raised their hats
politely to the clergyman.
  "Rev," Swann said--he was the thin trader
who acted as the deacon. "How about looking in on
the sinners in Drunk Town?"
  "Well, Mr. Swann, it is, how shall I
say, on the way."

  In her little house in the Yoshiwara, Hinodeh
waited. Furansu-san had said he would arrive
tonight but he might be late. She was dressed
to undress, her night kimono and under-kimonos
the finest, her hair shining, tortoiseshell and
silver combs decorating the swept-up coiffure
that showed the nape of her neck perfectly, the combs
only there to take away--to allow her hair
to fall to her waist, hiding the erotic.
  I wonder what is so erotic about the nape of a
woman's neck to men, she asked herself, and why is
hiding it erotic too? Men, how strange! But
she knew that letting her hair fall excited
Furansu-san like any client and this was her only
concession to their pact. This alone she would do in the
light.
  In the dark before dawn, when he was with her, her
maiko would softly awaken her and she would dress
in the dark, if he awoke or if he did not.
Then she would move to the second room and close
the door, her maiko guarding the door, and would
sleep again if she was tired. He had agreed
never to enter this sanctuary--after the first time she had
insisted: "In this way the privacy of the night
may extend into the day," she had said.
  "Please?"'
  "In this way that which you saw once will never
change, whatever the gods decree."
  A tremor went through her. Much as she tried,
she could not cast out the sensation that the seed of the vile
Sore God he had implanted within her was
gathering strength, growing, readying to burst forth
everywhere. Daily, she scrutinized herself.
Minutely. Only Raiko was trusted to make
sure those places she could not see herself were
examined as closely and were, as yet,
blemishless. "Daily is too much,
Hinodeh," Raiko had said before she had agreed
to the contract. "Nothing maybe happen
for years ..."
  "So sorry, Raiko-san. Daily, it is
a condition."
  "Why are you agreeing to this at all? You have a
good future in our World. You may never reach first
Class, but you are educated, your mama-san
says you have a long list of clients who are
pleased with you, she said you could marry a well-to-do
merchant or farmer or sword maker, that you are
sensible and would never be wanting for a good match."
  "Thank you for your concern, Raiko-san, but you
agreed with my mama-san that you would not question me or
pry into my past, where I come from or to seek
reasons. In return you share with her a
percentage of the money I will earn for this year, and
perhaps another. Let me say again, the reason I
accept the possible contract is that I wish it."
  Oh yes I wish it and how lucky I am.
  Now she was twenty-two. Born on a farm
outside Nagasaki in the province of Hizen
on the South Island, and when she was five, she was
invited into the Floating World by one of the many women
intermediaries who travelled the country seeking
children who could become possible geisha, art
persons, those who would be trained, like Koiko, in
the arts and not purely as an netsujo-jin, a
person for passion. Her parents agreed and were
given money and a promissory note for five
yearly payments, beginning in ten years, the amount
depending on the child's success.
  As an art person she had not been successful
--at the samisen or singing or dancing or as an
actress--but as a person of passion from fifteen
when she made her debut, better educated than
her contemporaries, she soon became
important to her mama-san and to herself. In those
days her name was Gekko, Moonbeam, and though there
were many foreigners in Nagasaki at that time, she
knew not one of them, her House catering only
to Japanese of the highest order.
  One October, the Month Without Gods, she
received a new client. He was a year older than
her, eighteen, a goshi and the son of a goshi--an
average swordsman, average soldier but to her
her dream person. His name was Shin Komoda.
  Their passion blossomed. As much as the
mama-san tried to curb their mutual
magnetism--the youth was poor, his bills
remained unpd--nothing she could say or do had
any effect. Until the spring of the
following year. Without telling Gekko, the
mama-san went to the youth's home and bowed before his
mother and, politely, asked for payment.
  There was no money to pay. The mother asked for time.
  The youth was forbidden to see Gekko again.
Outwardly he obeyed his parents, but inwardly
nothing they said or did had any effect. Within a
week, disguised, they ran away together, disappearing
into the sprawling port. There they changed their names
and with some money she had saved, and jewelry she
brought with her, they purchased passage in steerage
on a coastal ship sailing that day for Yedo.
  Within the week Shin Komoda was dishonored in his
village and declared ronin. Again the mama-san
went to see his mother. It was a matter of face, of
honor, that their son's bills were paid. His mother's
only possession of value and her pride, was her
long and beautiful plume of hair. With her
husband's agreement she went to a wigmaker in
Nagasaki. Without hesitation the man bought. The
money was just enough to pay their son's bills. So, for
them honor was satisfied.
  In Yedo, at the limit of their money,
Gekko and Shin managed to find safe lodgings in
the slums of the city. And a Buddhist priest
to marry them. Without papers, either of them, and their
real past obliterated, life was difficult,
almost impossible, but for a year they lived
happily, keeping to themselves, on the threshold of
poverty. That did not matter for they basked in
each other's company and their love increased and was
fruitful, and though her money dwindled to nothing,
however much she tried to be prudent and his pay
hardly fed them--the only work he could find was as a
guard at a low-class brothel that was not even in the
Yedo Yoshiwara--it did not matter.
  Nothing mattered. They were together. They were
surviving. And she kept their two tiny rooms
spotless and made of them a palace and sanctuary
for him and the child and as much as she offered and offered, he
refused and refused, "Never! Never never never
again will any other man ever know you, swear it!" She
swore it.
  When their son was a year old Shin was killed in
a brawl. With his death the light went out of her.
  A week later the brothel mama-san
propositioned her. She thanked her and refused
saying she was returning to their home in Nara. In
the market she bought a bright new candle, a red
one, and that night when the child was asleep,
quietly she lit it, to watch it and to think what
she should do until the flame died, petitioning the
gods, promising them that when the last fluttering was
gone she would decide what was best for her son,
asking for their help to make the decision wise.
  The flame had died long since, the decision so
simple, so correct: She must send her son
back to his father's parents. Her son must go
alone--she must pretend she and her husband had
committed jinsai, joint ritual suicide, in
apology to his parents for the hurt they had done
them. To be accepted the child must have at least a year
of money, preferably more. He must be clothed
well and travel well with a trusted nurse, more
money. Only in this way could he gain his
heritage, samurai. Last, there was no point
obeying an oath to the dead when the future of their
living child was at stake.
  In the morning she left her son with a neighbor
andwiththe last of her money bought the best kimono and
parasol she could find in the thieves market, then,
penniless, went to the best hairdresser near the
gates of Yedo's Yoshiwara. There she bartered
a month's future earnings for the best
up-to-date hairstyle and massage and facial
and manicure and pedicure and other intimacies--
and information.
  Information cost a second month.
  That afternoon she sallied through the gates and went
straight to the House of Wisteria. The mama-san
was a pattern of everyone she had ever known, always
degrees of perfection in their dress and
coiffure, always a measure too heavy, with
makeup that veered on being masklike, eyes so
gentle to customers that could become granite hard
in an instant, eyes that could make her girls
quiver with fear, and always scented richly with best
perfume she could afford that still could never quite disguise
the pervading smell of sak`e. This mama-san was
spare, her name Meikin.
  "So sorry, I don't take ladies without
papers or history," the mama-san said. "We
are very law-abiding here."
  "I'm honored to hear it, Madam, but I have
a history, and with your help we can invent another that
will satisfy the most inquisitive Bakufu
officials while satisfying the nosey toad's
probe massively, when I can find it."
  Meikin laughed. Her eyes did not. "What
training have you had and where? And what is
your name?"
  "My name is Hinodeh. The where is
unimportant, the what?" Gekko told her about
the geisha teachers and failure to realize their
expectations. Then her practical training, the
sorts of clients she had and their numbers.
  "Interesting. But so sorry, I have no opening
here, Hinodeh," the woman said, overkindly.
"Come back tomorrow. I will make enquiries, perhaps
a friend could take you."
  "So sorry, please may I ask you
to reconsider," sure that tomorrow she would not be
admitted on some excuse or other. "You are the
best, and the most trustworthy." She gritted her
teeth and, praying the information was correct, added
delicately, "Even shishi know that."
  The color left the mama-san's face though
her expression did not change. "You and your lover
ran away and now he has abandoned you?" she
asked calmly.
  "No, Madam."
  "Then he is dead."
  "Yes, Madam."
  "You have a child or children, which?"
  "A son."
  The older woman sighed. "A son. He is
with you?"
  "He is with his father's family."
  "How old is he?"
  "A year and three months."
  Meikin had sent for tea and they drank in
silence, Gekko trembling inside, afraid that
the threat had gone too far, sure that the other
woman was wondering where the information came from, and how
she, a stranger--dangerous enough in itself--came by the
knowledge. Or if she was a Sh@ogunate spy. If a
spy, Gekko reasoned, surely I would not have
said that, not on the first interview.
  At length the other woman said, "You may not
stay here, Hinodeh, but I have a sister who has
a fine house in the next street. There's a
price for the introduction."
  "In advance may I humbly thank you for
helping me."
  "First, you will swear to excise bad thoughts from your
head. Forever."
  "On my life."
  "On your son's life is better."
  "On my son's life."
  "Second, you will be a model
Lady of our World, calm, obedient and worthy of
trust."
  "On my life, and my son's life."
  "Third ... the third can wait until we
see if my sister agrees to succor the person
I see before me."
  The third was a matter of money, the split between
the two mama-sans. It was settled
satisfactorily. She had made a financial
arrangement with her neighbor to care for her son,
visiting him secretly every two weeks in the
morning of her day off, the lie she had told
Meikin not really a lie as he was already committed
to his father's parents.
  Soon, once again, she was popular but not
popular enough. The payment to the hairdresser
became continuous, to the masseuse, to the costumer.
There was never quite enough left over to save. By this time
her son was an open secret with both mama-sans
who, of course, had her watched, and followed.
They never mentioned the son to her but understood with
compassion. Then, one day her mama-san had sent
for her and told her about the gai-jin who would pay
enough, in advance, to send the child to his future, with
money for two years of food, at least two, and
enough left over to guarantee his safe delivery
wherever he was to be sent.
  She had accepted with alacrity.
  After the first hideous night she had wanted to end
her life, the man was so bestial. As much as she
had wept and begged, Raiko had refused,
implacably, for she had warned her in advance that
this could not be done for at least a month.
Fortunately there were days to recover and to plan a
new defense between them. The defense had conquered the
Beast, as she thought of him, and had changed him,
temporarily. Now he was docile, and cried a
lot, and required passion in all its aberrations,
but underneath his meek and pleasant manner she could
feel the violence still bubbling, ready to explode.
  In the quiet and lovely surroundings Hinodeh
waited, her nerves tangled. The moment he
knocked on the street gate, her maiko would
come running to alert her. She still had time, so she
folded herself into the Lotus Seat position for
meditation and sent her mind to Zen. Soon she was
prepared.
  Joining with the Beast was bearable. Curious how
different he is, she thought, built differently
than a civilized person, a little
longer and larger but without any of a civilized
person's firmness and strength.
  So different from Shin who was smooth and sweet and
so strong. Curiously, there had been no sign in
her husband of his gai-jin ancestor,
Anjin-san, who, two and a half centuries
before, took the name Komoda for this second
family in Nagasaki--his first family living
in Izu where he built ships for his liege lord,
Sh@ogun Toranaga.
  Thank all gods for him. Because of him,
eventually my Shin was born, and born samurai,
and so is our son.
  She smiled so happily. Her son was almost
three weeks on his journey, the two servants
trustworthy. In their safekeeping was a money
instrument drawn on the Gyokoyama in the name of
Shin's mother for almost three years of food and
lodging money for her son, and for his grandparents.
  Everything taken care of, she thought proudly.
I've done my duty to our son, Shin-sama.
I have protected your honor. Everything was in
order. Even Raiko's final question before we
agreed the final clause of the final contract with the
Beast: "Last, Hinodeh, what am I to do with
your body?"'
  "Throw it on a dung heap for all I care,
Raiko-san, it's already defiled. Leave it to the
dogs."




















             BOOK FOUR

                 

              YOKOHAMA

    Tuesday, 9th December:
  In the predawn light, the Struan cutter
sped away from the frigate Pearl and hurried for
their wharf. Her bow waves were clean, she was at
maximum speed and her plum of smoke jaunty.
Wind was fair and offshore, with an overcast that
promised to break up by noon.
  The Bosun's binoculars were trained on
Struan's windows. A light was on but he could not
tell if Struan was there or not. Then the engine
coughed, stopped, his balls seemed to hit him under
the chin and all breathing on the boat ceased. After a
couple of seconds the engine picked up but coughed
again and picked up again but now it sounded off kilter.
  "Christ Almighty, Roper, get below," he
shouted to the engineer. "Rest of you buggers get oars
on deck in case we're stuffed ... Jesus
Christ, and McFay's got smoke out of his arse
that we're up to scratch ... Roper," he
roared, "wot's the problem for God's sake,
Roper. Get the lead out!" Again he trained his
binoculars on the window. No sign of anyone.
  But Struan was there, his binoculars on the
cutter, and he had been watching since it arrived
at the frigate. He cursed for he could see the
Bosun clearly now and the man should have known he would
be watching and could easily give him a signal,
yes or no. "Not his fault for God's sake,"
he said, "you forgot to set the signal. Idiot!"
Never mind, the weather's good enough, no harbinger of
any storm at all points, not that a small one
would hurt Pearl. He refocused on the
flagship. Her cutter was returning from visiting
Pearl. She must've been delivering orders.
  The door behind him swung open. Chen came in
breezily with a steaming cup of tea. "'morn,
Tai-pan. You-ah no slip heya, gud cha
chop chop?"
  "Ayeeyah! How many times do I have to tell you
to talk the civilized tongue and not pidgin. Are
your ears filled with the dung of your ancestors and
your brains curdled?"
  Chen kept the smile on his face but groaned
inside. He had expected the sally to make
Struan laugh. "Ayeeyah, so
sorry," and added the traditional Chinese
greeting, the equivalent of "Good morning,"
"Have you eaten rice today?"
  "Thank you." Through the glasses Malcolm
saw an officer get out of the flagship cutter and
go up the gangway. Nothing to indicate one way
or another. Damn!
  He accepted the cup. "Thanks." At the
moment he had no special pain, just the normal
bearable ache, he had already taken his morning
dose. For the last week he had managed to cut
back on the amount. Now he had one in the
morning, one in the evening, and had sworn, in
future, it would be one a day if this day went
well.
  The tea was good. It was mixed with real milk,
thick with sugar and as it was the first of the day, it was
laced with a small tot of rum, a tradition
started by Dirk Struan, his father had told him.
  "Chen, put out my heavy breeches and jersey
and I'll wear a topcoat."
  Chen was startled. "I heard the voyage was off,
Tai-pan."
  "In the name of all gods when did you hear
that?"
  "Last night, Tai-pan. Fifth Cousin in
the House of Chief Foreign Devil heard him
talking with Big Ship Squashed Toadstool
Nose who said No voyage."
  Malcolm's stomach sank and he groped to the
window. To his shock he saw the cutter was
wallowing two hundred metres offshore. No
bow wave. He began to curse violently and then
he saw funnel smoke begin and the bow wave
appear as the cutter picked up speed. His
binoculars raked the deck but all he could see was
the Bosun shouting, with oars on deck in case of a
further breakdown. At that speed the cutter would be
at their dock in under ten minutes.
  With Chen's help he dressed. A quick check
showed that the cutter was almost ashore. He opened the
window and craned out as the Bosun climbed on to the
jetty and began running as fast as his big belly
would allow.
  "Ho there, Bosun!"
  The grizzled man was panting by the time he was
near enough to the window. "Cap'n Marlowe's
compliments," he gasped, "will you and the, and the Lady
please step aboard."
  Struan let out a whoop of joy.
He sent for Ah Soh, told her to wake and
dress Angelique quickly. Then, quietly,
he said, "Listen, Chen, and don't interrupt or
I shall be like a firecracker ..." and gave him
instructions what to pack, and what to order Ah
Soh to pack and to bring the trunks aboard
Prancing Cloud at sunset. "Missy and
I will dine aboard and sleep aboard and you two will
stay aboard also, and return to Hong Kong with us
..."
  Chen was overjoyed. "Hong Kong! Ayeeyah
Tai-pa--"
  "... And both of you will keep your mouths shut
tighter than a fly's anus or I will ask
Noble House Chen to remove your names from the
family book." He saw Chen go grey. He
had never used the threat before. The family book was
every Chinese male's connection to immortality,
to their ancestors in the mystic past and to far-off
descendants, when he himself would be considered a
distant ancestor, and beyond. Wherever a Chinese was
born in the world, he was written into his
ancestral village records. Without that he
did not exist.
  "Yes, Master. But Ah Tok?"
  "I'll deal with her. Fetch her."
  Chen went for the door. She was outside it. He
fled. She strode in. Struan said that he had
decided she would follow in the next boat and that was
that.
  "Oh ko, my son," she said, her voice
honeyed. "What you decide for your old Mother is
not what your old Mother decides is best for herself
and her son. We will go home. We will be silent.
No stinky foreign devils will know. Of course
all civilized persons will be interested in the
plot. We will go home together. Do you take your
whore with you?" She stood under his tongue-lashing,
ordering her never ever to use that word again--or else.
  "Ayeeyah," she muttered as she left, her
words dying away gradually, "your old Mother
won't call that whore your whore again but all
gods bear witness, if not whore what do I
call her, whore is the correct name? Is my
son daft ..."
  When he saw Angelique his anger
evaporated. "My word!"
  She was wearing riding clothes, boots, long
skirt, tight at the waist, waistcoat and
cravat and coat and hat with a green
feather, gloves but no riding crop. "I thought this
best, darling, for boating," she said, smiling
gloriously.

  "Welcome aboard." Marlowe was at the head
of the gangway, looking splendid in uniform.
  Before stepping onto the deck, Malcolm
awkwardly hung on with his left hand,
Angelique holding his sticks, raised his top
hat formally, "Permission to come aboard?"
  Marlowe saluted and grinned. "Welcome, you
are both most welcome aboard. May I?" he
took Angelique's arm, weak from the intensity of
her smile and the cut of her jacket that
dramatized her figure, and led the way to the
bridge, forward of the funnel. He waited
until Malcolm was settled in a sea chair.
"Cast off, Mister Lloyd," he said to his
Number One, Davyd Lloyd. "Quarter
ahead and steady as she goes."
  Pearl eased off her moorings under power.
"Soon as we're clear we'll up speed," he
said. "Admiral's ordered us to conduct steam
trials in sight of the flagship."
  Struan's happiness vanished. "In sight of
him? We're not going out to sea, out of sight of
land?"
  Marlowe laughed. "I suppose he likes his
"children" on a short leash. It'll be fun, I
promise."
  Then we're aboard, but not aboard for the right
reason, Struan was thinking, the bastard's a
sadist! And if the Admiral had been aboard
he felt sure he would have killed him quite
happily. Well, not really, but I'd like the
bugger dealt with. He'll wish he had helped
me. When I get back I'll reverse everything
and be a thorn in his nose he won't forget.
  Meanwhile what do I do now?
  There was so much going on that Marlowe and
Angelique did not notice the despair he
strove to conceal. The frigate was making way through
the fleet, not a few sailors and officers from the
other ships noticing Angelique, and, some of
them, the fine way Pearl was being conned.
Aboard the French flagship, the twenty-gun
paddle steamer they passed close to, sailors
whistled and waved, appalling the British
officers.
  Good God, Marlowe thought, what
bloody bad manners and awful discipline! All
the same he watched benignly as Angelique
waved back, to a chorus of whistles and
catcalls.
  To distract her, Marlowe said, "We're going
to make speed trials, Angelique, under steam
first and then sail. Have to strain the new mast, test
her, you won't remember but we lost our mainmast
in the storm. You see ..." He chatted away,
explaining this and that, answering every question she felt
obliged to ask.
  For herself she feigned interest, really wanting just
to be quiet, to feel the sea wind ruffle her
hair now that she had taken off her hat and was
basking in the new freedom, wanting the wind
to broom away the ever-present stench of
Yokohama that was so much a way of life here, and
in Hong Kong, as to be hardly noticed now,
to gaze ahead and dream of the Channel and blue
seas and the fine coast of home, going home. We
French desire our land so much, whereas the English
seem to be able to make themselves at home anywhere and
really don't need England, not like we need France
...
  "We'll hove to at noon," Marlowe was
saying, so content to be Captain of Pearl, "and
I've arranged tiffin in my cabin and there's a
bunk if you wish to siesta ..."
  The morning passed nicely. Every half hour the
ship's bell rang the changes and even
Malcolm was dragged out of his despair as the ship
went from one end of the bay to the other, twisted and
turned and rushed ahead and went into reverse. "In
a moment, we'll stop steaming and it will be, All
sails ho!" Marlowe said.
  "I do so prefer sail," she said, "the engine
noise is really so distracting. Sailing is so
much more pleasant, don't you agree, Malcolm,
ch@eri?"
  "Yes indeed," Malcolm said contentedly, his
arm around her waist, holding her against the tilt of the
deck.
  Marlowe said, "I agree too, so does almost
every man in the British Navy. Of course we still
have to sail most of the time--can't carry enough fuel and
coal's so filthy! But on a dirty night when
safe harbor's just ahead in the teeth of the gale,
or the enemy twice your size with twice the
cannon but he's sail and you not, you bless old
Stephenson and British engineers for
giving you the blessing of going against the wind. I'd
take you below but as I said, there's coal dust
everywhere and noise."
  "I'd love to peek. May I?"
  "Of course. Malcolm?"
  "No thanks--you two go ahead," Malcolm
said. He had been over engine rooms of their own
steamships since a boy and engines had never
interested him, only their efficiency and cost and
amount of coal they consumed.
  Before leaving the bridge Marlowe checked the lie
of his ship and the wind. They were three quarters of a
mile offshore, well away from the fleet and the
merchantmen. "Number One, you have the conn. When
we're abeam the flagship, stop steaming and all
sails ho, course due east."
  "Aye aye sir."
  Malcolm watched Marlowe lead Angelique
to the midships gangway with a pang of envy at his
light step, at the same time amused by the
infectious charm he poured all over her. He
relaxed in his chair. The sea and the sky and the wind
and the space had taken his gloom away. It was good
to be afloat, wonderful to be part of such an
efficient, well-kept and proud fighting ship,
grand to be comfortable and safe in a sea chair and his
mind had given him different plans to cope with tomorrow
and the days after.
  Joss. I'm not going to worry about anything,
he promised himself. Remember your oath and the new
era!
  After Gornt arrived in Yokohama like a
gift from heaven, Malcolm had thanked God for the
reprieve and had sworn, if Gornt's information
was what he claimed, that forevermore he would just do the
best he could, and be satisfied with that. With enough
information to smash the Brocks, he was certain beyond
all doubt his mother would rush to his side.
Angelique was all that mattered and being
tai-pan, but not only in name.
  That same night he had been impelled to look
in the mirror. It had to be done. Some power forced
him to regard himself for the first real time in years,
to really study himself deeply, not only his face.
  At length, he thought: This is what you are,
you're still badly hurt inside, you can't straighten
up too well, your legs don't work as they should,
but you can stand and you can walk and you will improve. The
rest of your body works, and your mind. Accept it.
Remember what Mother and Father kept
telling you since you were a child: "Accept your
joss, that's what Dirk would always say. Dirk
had half a foot shot off and that didn't stop
him, Dirk was shot and cut a dozen times, almost
killed at Trafalgar as a powder monkey,
almost destroyed by Tyler Brock half a dozen
times, accept your joss. Be Chinese, was
Dirk's advice. Do your best and devil take
the hindmost!"
  His heart began pounding. Dirk Dirk
Dirk. God damn Dirk Struan! You've
loathed having him thrown in your face, you've always
been petrified you'd never measure up to his
impossible image. Admit it!
  The reflection did not answer. But he did.
  "I've his blood, I've his Noble House
to run, I'm tai-pan, I do my best, but
I'll never measure up to him, I admit it,
God curse him, that's the truth! That's my
joss."
  Good, his reflection seemed to say. But why
hate him? He doesn't hate you. Why hate
him like you've hated him all your life--you've
hated him all your life. Haven't you?
  "That's true, I hate him and always have!"
  Saying it aloud had shocked him. But it was
true--and all the love and respect a sham.
Yes, he had hated him, but suddenly, there in
front of the mirror, he no longer did. Why?
  I don't know. Maybe it's because of Edward
Gornt, maybe he's the good spirit who's
unlocked me from my past as he wants me
to unlock him from his. Hasn't Morgan
poisoned his life and his mother's and father's? Not that
Dirk poisoned mine, but his spectre came between
Mother and Father and poisoned them--wasn't that their
joss, that Father died hating him, and as much as Mother
openly worships him ... in her heart she
hates him for not marrying her.
  There on the bridge of the frigate, he
remembered the cold sweat soaking him, then later
drinking some whisky, but not the other stuff,
rupturing that obsession there and then, knowing another
truth: he craved it, and was addicted.
  Too many truths faced. Not easy to face
yourself, the most difficult--and dangerous--task a
man can do, must do once in his life, to be at
peace. I've done it, like it or not.
  "Number One," the young signalman said
to Lieutenant Lloyd, his
telescope trained on his distant counterpart.
"Message from the flagship, sir."

  Two decks below, the engine room was a
dungeon of heat and throbbing noise and dust and
blackness and stench that was pierced with squares of
blazing coals as half-naked stokers opened
furnace covers under the great boilers to shovel in
more coal or rake the embers to receive more coal, and
then more.
  Angelique and Marlowe were standing on one of the
overhead iron grills, the air swirling up
filled with the smell of coke and fire and burning
oil and sweat and steam. Bodies below sheened with
sweat, big-bellied men with muscles bunched,
their razor-sharp shovels screeching along the
iron deck into the coal bunkers to come back
full, a deft throw and the coal scattered in a
level bed to fire at once and be replenished.
  Aft, the pounding engine shone with care and oil, more
men using long-nosed cans to squirt oil
into joints, others cleaning with swatches of cotton
waste, others tending dials and pumps and valves
as the engine drove the propeller shaft against the
crush of the sea. Jets of steam from valves, more
oil and cleaning and constant attention to pistons and
levers and cogs and more coal and Angelique found
it vastly exciting--those below oblivious of them.
  Proudly Marlowe pointed and explained over the
roar and she answered with a nod and a smile from time
to time, holding his arm lightly to steady herself, not
hearing a thing or caring to listen, possessed by the
engine room that seemed to her a masculine
Valhalla where machines were married to men, now part
of them, primitive yet futuristic, slaves
tending their masters and not the other way around.
  Unnoticed the signalman came up behind them
and saluted. Not being heard he came forward,
saluted again and broke her spell. He handed
Marlowe the written message. Marlowe read it
quickly, then nodded and shouted at the man,
"Acknowledge!" He leaned over to Angelique,
"Sorry we have to go now."
  At that moment signal bells from the bridge
sounded below. The engineer officer acknowledged the
order. Men rushed to close cocks and open
others, leaning on levers and checking dials. As
steam power came off the huge driving shaft and the
engine began to slow, the noise lessened and the
stokers leaned gratefully on their
shovels, their chests gulping air heavy with coal
dust and wrung out the towels they wore about their
necks. One man turned on the bunker and
cursed it, still drowned by the roar, and opened his
trousers and pissed on the coals in a jet that
ended in steam to the laughter of other men. Marlowe
hastily took her arm and guided her away, up
the gangway. One stoker noticed her, then
another and before she had gone, they were all staring at
her departing figure, silently. When she had
gone out of sight, one of them made obscene
movements to more laughter mixed with a sudden, sad
silence.
  On deck the instant lack of noise and
breathing in the sea air, made her feel quite giddy
for a moment and she held on to Marlowe. "Are you
all right?"
  "Oh yes," she said. "Thank you, John, that
was, well, extraordinary."
  "Oh?" Marlowe said, absently, his attention
on sailors in the rigging and on deck hoisting and
adjusting sails. "I suppose it is, the first
time. At sea, in a storm it gets rough down
there. Stokers and engineers are a race apart."
He took her over to Malcolm. "Sorry, have
to leave you a moment."
  He went below to his cabin that was aft. The
Marine sentry saluted as he passed. The
ship's safe was under his bunk. He unlocked it
nervously. The message from the Admiral had
read, "Activate sealed orders,
1/A16/12." In the safe were the ship's
log, codes, money for pay, pay book,
punishment book, manuals, manifests,
receipts, Naval Regs and several sealed
envelopes given him by Flag this morning.
  His hand shook slightly, finding the correct
one. Is it the Return to the fleet, prepare for
War, he expected? He sat at the table that was
surrounded by seats, screwed to the deck, and broke
the seal.

  "It was extraordinary, down there, Malcolm.
Ghastly in a way, all those men down there,
astonishing--and if it's like that in a small ship like
this, what would it be like on a big steamer--say like
on the Great Eastern?"
  "It's astonishing, Angel. I saw her
launched on the Thames the last time I was in
London, four years ago, when I
finished school--my, was I glad to have done with
schooling. She's completely of iron, four
thousand tons burthen, the biggest in the world by far and
built to carry emigrants, thousands at a time,
to Australia. It took weeks to launch her--
they did it sideways, a complete cock-up and
she almost sank. Poor Brunel who designed
and built her went broke many times, the companies
he floated did. She was ill-fated, caught
fire on her maiden voyage and almost gutted--and
that killed him. Damned if I'd sail on her
--ill-fated she is, and was, from the first plate
laid ..." He saw Marlowe come on deck and
frowned. Now there was no humor on the man's
face.
  The Bosun rang eight bells. Noon.
"I have the conn, Number One," Marlowe said.
  "Yes sir."
  "Why don't you take Miss Angelique
for'rard, she might like to see some of our deck
cannon close up."
  "Gladly. Miss?"
  Obediently she followed him down the gangway
and along the deck. He was short, freckled and
her height. "You're Welsh, Mr. Lloyd?"
she asked.
  He laughed, his voice singsong. "Welsh as the
hills of Llandrindod Wells that is my home,
look you."
  She laughed with him and, leaning against the tilting
deck whispered, "Why am I being sent off like a
schoolgirl?"
  "I wouldn't know about that, Missy." She saw
his deep-set brown eyes look back and then they
were turned on her. "The Captain's wants
to talk about lunch, no doubt, or asking him, your
man, if he wants to use the head, the toilet.
Man talk," he said and the eyes smiled.
  "You like him, don't you?"
  "The Captain is the Captain. Now,
cannon, Ma'am!"
  Her laugh trilled, the sailors nearby were
warmed and Marlowe and Malcolm on the bridge
heard her too and turned to look. "She makes
a pretty picture, Malcolm."
  "Yes she does. You were saying. Tiffin?"
  "Does that sound all right? The cook's first
class on his apple turnovers." The menu was
to be fish stew, chicken and salt-pork pie and
dumplings, cold roast chicken, cheddar
cheese and apple turnovers. "I've a couple
of bottles of Montrachet, '55, chilled, that
I've been saving against a special occasion, and a
Chambertin '52."
  "You live rather well," Malcolm said, very
impressed.
  Marlowe smiled. "Not really but this is a
special day and, to tell the truth, I scrounged
the Chambertin--it was my Old Man's
favorite. The Montrachet, he gave me a
couple of cases when I came out."
  "He's Navy?"
  "Oh yes." The way Marlowe said it
expressed surprise that the question needed to be
asked. "He's Commander in Chief, Plymouth."
He hesitated, began to talk and stopped.
  "What's the problem? We're ordered back?"
  "No." Marlowe looked at him. "I was
given several sealed orders this morning, along with
written permission to bring you aboard and to be back
by sundown, without fail. A few minutes ago
Flag ordered me to open one of them. I wasn't
told to tell you about it but I wasn't told not
to. Perhaps you'd explain. The message said,
"Should Mr. Struan ask a peculiar favor,
you may, if you wish, grant it.""
  The world stood still for Malcolm Struan. He
did not know if he was alive or dead and his head
reeled and if he had not been sitting he would
certainly have fallen over.
  "Christ Almighty!" Marlowe gasped.
"Bosun fetch a tot of rum right smartly!"
  The Bosun took to his heels and Malcolm
managed to choke out, "No, no I'm, all right
... actually a rum would be, would be grand." He
saw Marlowe's lips moving and knew he was being
shaken but his ears were not hearing anything above the pounding
of his heart and then he felt the wind on his cheeks
and the sound of the sea returned.
  "Here, sorr," the Bosun was saying, holding
the glass to his lips. The rum slid down his
throat. In seconds Struan felt better.
He began to grope to his feet. "Better
take it easy, sorr," the Bosun said
uneasily, "looks like you seed a ghost."
  "No ghost, Bosun, but I did see an
angel, your Captain!" Marlowe stared back
blankly. "I'm not mad," Malcolm said
stumbling over his words, "John, sorry,
Captain Marlowe, is there somewhere we
can talk privately?"
  "Of course. Here." Uncomfortably Marlowe
motioned to the Bosun who left the bridge.
Only the helmsman and signalman remained.
"Signalman, go for'rard. Helmsman, close
your ears."
  Struan said, "My peculiar request is:
I want you to sail out of sight of land for a moment,
and marry Angelique and me."
  "You what?" It was Marlowe's turn to be
disoriented. He heard Malcolm repeat what
he had said. "You're insane," he stuttered.
  "No, not really." Malcolm was in control
now, his future in the balance, with the Admiral's
words, if you wish you may grant it, carved
on his brain. "Let me explain."
  He began. A few minutes later the steward
came up and went away and a little later came again
with "Cook's compliments, sir, lunch is ready
in your cabin," but again Marlowe waved him away,
concentrating and not interrupting.
  "... that's the reason," Malcolm finished,
"the why of the Admiral, me, you, my mother. Now,
please, will you grant my peculiar favor?"
  "Can't," Marlowe shook his head, "sorry,
old boy, I've never married anyone and I
doubt if regulations'd allow it."
  "The Admiral's given you permission to do what
I ask."
  "He put it rather bloody carefully, old
boy: "grant it if I wished." My God,
that's putting my head in the old yardarm noose,
old boy," Marlowe said, his mouth running away
from him as he foresaw all kinds of future
disasters, "you don't know Ketterer like I know him,
my God no, any senior officer for that matter!
If I choose wrong here he'll have my balls
in the wringer, my career's up the bloody spout
..." He paused for breath, shaking his head and
mumbled on. "No way I could do that, no w--"
  "Why not? Don't you approve of us?"
  "Of course I approve of you, for goodness'
sake, but your mother doesn't, I mean she says
no to the marriage, Sir William's got his
finger stuck in the pie, the Church won't, other
Captains won't and, dammit, you're both
legal minors so if I did it wouldn't stick and
she's ... damn it, you're a minor and so's she
... just can't risk it ..." A sudden thought and he
glanced shorewards. "Not unless I
signal Ketterer. I'll ask permission."
  "If you do that you'll lose face with him forever.
If he wanted you to do that he would have said so."
  Marlowe glared back at him. He re-read the
Admiral's exact wording and groaned. Struan
was right. His future was in the balance. Christ
Almighty, why did I invite them aboard? The
first thing in his life he remembered his father saying
was, In the Navy you run your ship by rules and
regulations, by the bloody book, except if
you're bloody Nelson and there's only ever been
one of him! "Sorry, old boy, no."
  "You're our last hope. Now our only
hope."
  "Sorry, no."
  Struan sighed and eased his shoulders, playing his
ace. "Angel!" he called out. She heard the
second call and came back with Lt. Lloyd
and stood beside him. "Angel, how would you like to be
married today, right now," he said, loving her so very
much. "John Marlowe can perform the ceremony if
he wants. How about it?"
  The wonder spread over her and she did not hear
Marlowe begin to say that he was so sorry he could not
but he was stopped by the passion of her embrace and
kiss, and then she did the same for Struan again and
him again, "Oh, yes, oh yes ... John, how
wonderful, you will, won't you, oh thank you thank
you, how wonderful, please please please,"
begging with another irresistible snuggle and he
heard himself say, "Yes, of course, why not,
glad to," saying his doom words as underplayed as
he could, though inside feeling more heated than he
had ever been and still meaning to say, No.
  The helmsman sealed the matter with a joyful
shout, "Three cheers for Cap'n Marlowe,
we've a weddin' aboard!"

  Lunch was a hilarious pre-wedding feast, just
two or three glasses of wine to test and taste
the rare quality, not too much food, the rest put
aside for later, all of them too excited and
too anxious to begin. Once he had made the
decision Marlowe ordered the ship out to sea under
full sail and became their most enthusiastic
supporter, wanting the ceremony to be memorable
and perfect.
  But before proposing a prenuptial toast at the
end of the meal, he said gravely, "God knows if
it'll really be legal, but I can find
nothing in Naval Regs that says it won't be,
or it can't be done, nothing refers to the age of the
persons, only that both must formally agree before
witnesses that they freely give their consent, and they
sign an affidavit that's entered by me in the
ship's log. Once we get ashore, all
hell and or congratulations will break out and you may
have to, perhaps should go through a church ceremony--both
Churches will scream bloody murder at our
effort anyway."
  Angelique heard an undercurrent. "But,
John, it's all right, isn't it? Malcolm's
told me about oppositions and as to Father Leo
..." Her nose crinkled with distaste. "You
won't get into trouble, will you?"
  "Perish the thought, Admiral's given
permission," Marlowe told her more grandly than
he really felt. "Enough said, here's to your
healths, and to future generations!"
  Angelique began to get up to drink too but
Struan stopped her. "Sorry, darling, it's
bad luck to drink your own health, just an old
custom, and aboard Royal Navy ships you
drink toasts sitting down."
  "Oh, sorry." Her sleeve caught a
glass, tapped it against another and a bell-like ringing
began. At once both Marlowe and Struan
reached over and stopped it.
  Malcolm said, "Sorry, darling, just another
old seafaring superstition. If you let the ringing of a
glass die of its own accord somewhere in the world a
sailor drowns."
  "Oh." Her face lost its glow. "I wish
I'd known, so many times in the past ..."
  "Not to worry," Marlowe said quickly. "If you
don't know, then the superstition doesn't count.
Right, Malcolm?"
  "Yes, you're right again. I would like to propose
a toast, Angelique, to John Marlowe,
Captain, Royal Navy, gentleman and the best
friend we have!"
  The small cabin was filled with animated talk
and laughter and then Lloyd announced that all was
ready on deck. A last kiss, so tender between
them, and they had gone aloft and stood there, hand in
hand, both committed.
  The ship was into wind, her sails and spars
trembling. Those of the ship's company who could be
spared were lined up, slickered and spruced, facing
the quarterdeck where Malcolm and
Angelique stood before the Captain. He was
flanked by an honor guard of two Marines.
He opened Navy Regs to the right page and
motioned to the Marine bugler who sounded a clarion
call, the Bosun blew on his pipe and the company
came to attention. "We are gathered here as
witnesses to the marriage of these two people in the sight
of God ..."
  The swell of the sea did not touch them, nor the
wind that was gusting more than before. Around the horizon
were nimbus clouds, not yet threatening but
potentially dangerous. Overhead the sky was still
clear, and Marlowe wondered, briefly, if the
weather was an omen. No cause for alarm yet,
he thought. The ceremony was quickly over,
strangely fast for all of them, for Struan almost
an anticlimax. He had used the signet ring
from his little finger as the wedding ring. It was too big for
her but she held it solidly, staring at it with
disbelief. "I now pronounce you man and
wife."
  As they kissed there were three rousing cheers,
Marlowe called out, "Splice the mainbrace!"
the order for a tot of rum for all the company, to more
cheers.
  "Mrs. Struan, may I be the first
to congratulate you."
  Angelique threw her arms around him
passionately, tears of joy on her cheeks.
"Thank you, thank you."
  "Nothing," Marlowe said, embarrassed, then
shook Struan's hand. "Congratulations, old
man. Why don't we--" A short gust
crackled the canvas. "Why don't you two go
below and I'll join you in a moment," he said, then
turned away and forgot them, tending his ship.
"Let her fall off the wind, Number One.
Set course for Yokohama, under sail until
further orders. We'll steam to our moorings--we
may be in for a wetting. Signalman, give me
your pad. When we're in range of the flagship,
send this."

  Edward Gornt sat comfortably in the bay
window of the Brock Building, his feet propped
on a chair, idly watching the bay. The rim of
clouds had spread and promised storm, though at
this time of the year they could as quickly evaporate.
Behind him Norbert Greyforth sat at his desk
engrossed in paperwork. They had seen
Pearl sail off over the horizon but put no
special meaning on it. "Part of their trial,
suh, I suppose," Gornt had said. "Still
can't figure what could be aboard that's so
important."
  Norbert had nodded, secretly amused, and
returned to signing and checking documents and
manifests. A Brock freighter was in harbor,
due to sail in a few days and the last of her cargo
from Japan had to be accounted for: fifty pounds of
silkworm eggs for the French market--thirty
to fifty thousand eggs to the ounce--bales of raw
silk, and silk cloth for the London market,
lacquer goods, barrels of sak`e they were trying
to introduce into the English market, and also for
Japanese in the Philippines, cheap pottery
as ballast, coal--anything and everything that could find
a market, together with the remains of her inbound cargo
that had not been sold and would be traded on her
return journey. Some guns and opium in
special cases.
  "Cigar?" Gornt asked.
  "Thanks." They lit the thin cheroots, enjoying
them.
  "I've made a date with McFay
to finalize arrangements for tomorrow, suh."
  "Good." Norbert blew a cloud of smoke and
signed the last of the documents. He rang a
bell. In a moment his chief clerk and shroff
came in. "This is the lot, Periera."
  "Yes, Senhor." This small, fair man with
slightly oriental eyes, was--as with most
companies--Eurasian from Macao. "What about
the specials, Senhor?"
  "They stay off the manifest and in the
Captain's care."
  "There's a rumor that the Navy is going
to board and check cargo at random."
  "Let them. None of our specials are
illegal, by God, whatever the hell the fool
Struans do." Norbert dismissed him, then gave
his full attention on Gornt. Something had made
him suspicious. "Edward, perhaps I should call the
duel off, tell Struan tonight I'll accept his
compromise, the trap's baited, isn't it? I
let him go to Hong Kong to get deeper in the
shit, thinking he's won. Eh?"
  "You could. But why spare him a night of fear?
He has to be afraid--why comfort him? Would he
comfort you?"
  Norbert looked at him and saw the thin upper
lip and how it seemed to curl slightly with
malicious delight. He laughed to himself, thinking
about how special tonight could have been for Struan if
Ketterer was a different man, and that, now more than
ever, thought of the duel will take away what remained
of Struan's sleep. "I didn't think you'd
fit in with us, the Brocks. Revenge is sweet
for you too?"
  "Me, suh?" Gornt's eyebrows soared.
"I was thinking of you--I'm to serve you, wasn't that
the idea?"
  "It was indeed." Norbert hid his smile
deep inside. "Tomorrow then, but now we'll ..."
His sharp eyes caught a smudge on the
horizon through the window behind Gornt. "Is that
Pearl?" He got up and went to the window, also
training his glasses. It was the frigate all
right.
  "Steady as she goes," Norbert said softly
and Gornt wondered what he meant. Pearl was
in the process of furling her sails, black
clouds behind her. "Wind's picked up out there,"
Gornt said and trained his own binoculars. Her
smoke was pulled at right angles to her path.
  In the bay the rest of the fleet and merchantman
were at anchor. A few whitecaps. Norbert's
glasses went to Prancing Cloud. Nothing
untoward there. Then the flagship. Nothing. Back
to the frigate. They waited. Pearl was coming in quite
fast, bow wave churning. Again the flagship,
nothing. The frigate. Norbert could just discern
Angelique standing next to a man who must be
Struan.
  "Look," Gornt said, his voice picking up
excitement. "There. Can you see the signalman?"
  "Where? Ah yes."
  "He's semaphoring the flagship. First
flags are the standard opening," Gornt said quickly.
"Captain of HMS Pearl to Admiral.
Message reads ... Message reads:
A-Go-Rather-Every-Every-Do That-O
Rather-Every-Quite-Us-Every-So-T." Perplexed he stared
at Norbert for a moment. "What does that mean?"
  "Watch the flagship for any reply!"
Gornt obeyed. "Where the hell you learn to read
Navy flags?"
  "In Norfolk, Virginia, suh. When I
was a kid I used to watch the ships, ours and the
British. It became like a hobby.
Then my pa acquired a book, one American
and another British, with most of their standard
phrases and some of their codes. I used to win
bets for my pa when he would entertain officers,
usually at cards. He, my mother and him, he used
to entertain a lot, lavishly, that was before the
cotton crash and he lost most of his money."
  "Can you read any flags? Any codes?"
Norbert asked quickly, wondering if he could use
Gornt's knowledge. "Could you read Struan flags,
ship to ship or ship to shore?"
  "If they used standard international flag codes
but probably, like Brock's they have special
... Just a moment, message from the flagship:
Standard opening: "To Captain of Pearl from
Admiral Ketterer." Next standard:
"Return to your moorings at once." Next:
"When tied up and sea safe, report to the
flagship at once," adding the letters
"Will-I-That-Have Have-I-More". Last standard:
"Acknowledge."" Gornt glanced back
quickly, ""With him", Mr. Greyforth? Would that
be Struan?"
  "Bull's-eye."
  "Standard acknowledgment." Gornt put down the
glasses and rubbed his eyes, the concentration had
given him a headache. "Bull's eye? You know
what it all means?"
  "What's aboard Pearl that's so
important? Captain bloody Marlowe,
R.n." It took Norbert no time at all
to explain.
  "Married?" Gornt burst out. "You're
brilliant, suh!"
  "Never thought Ketterer would agree but it seems
he has. Why? He gains nothing." Norbert was
puzzled, then smiled spitefully. "Unless ...
unless he's ordered Struan and Marlowe aboard,
to mat Marlowe, and undo the deed right smartly--
to jam the knife further into Struan, to torture
him some more."
  "Can he?"
  "That bugger can do what the hell he likes if
the truth be known," Norbert said and spat into the
spittoon, then threw the butt of his cheroot into it
as well. "Every man jack aboard the fleet's
duty bound to obey him, and they would!"
  "You mean he could order them to go against the law?"
  "Let's put it this way: they've to obey
immediately or suffer the consequences--which
range from the cat to hanging to keelhauling. If
he wanted he could hang you from one of his yardarms,
then plead he'd been misled by juniors--he'd
beat any court-martial. Meanwhile you're
dead."
  "Then how could you be so ... so opposed to him,
to his face, Mr. Greyforth?"
  "Because, Ketterer's law-abiding, they breed
'em like that for the Royal Navy, special,
to obey orders from the next above, but mostly because
we've Wee Willie--that fiesty little bugger's
the one above. He's our real protection from
Ketterer, the General, Jappos and every other
bloody enemy--but that won't protect young
Struan from Ketterer's phlegm."

  "So, Captain Marlowe, Mr. Struan's
peculiar request was for you to go out of sight of land
--and to marry him to Miss Angelique
Richaud?"
  "Yes sir." Marlowe stood at attention
unable to read the Admiral's face. Ketterer was
flanked at the table in the great cabin aft by the
flagship Captain. Behind them, his
aide-de-camp, the Flag Lieutenant, stood
equally frozen.
  "And you did, knowing them to be minors?"
  "Yes sir."
  "Please give me a report, in writing,
by sundown, specifying your reasons, exactly,
and what occurred, exactly. Dismissed."
Marlowe saluted and began to leave as Ketterer
turned to the Captain, a weathered, craggy, ugly
man renowned for the toughness of his discipline, and
worship of Naval Regulations. "Captain
Donavan, perhaps you'd research the legal
position, eh?"
  "Yes sir." His blue eyes were merciless.
  "Good, that's all then--for the moment." This was the
last thing Marlowe heard before he closed the door
and his heart seemed to begin again.
  Struan was waiting in the anteroom outside.
Two marines stood guard suspiciously.
"Christ, did you get stick?"
  "No, not at all." Marlowe tried to sound
calm. "The Admiral, correctly, wants a
written report, that's all. I'll be getting
back to my ship. See you later." Before he could
leave, the cabin door opened and he died a little
more. Captain Donavan brushed past,
hardly acknowledging him or his salute. At the
doorway, the Flag Lieutenant said, "Mr.
Struan, Admiral's compliments, would you kindly
step in, please."
  Struan hobbled into the cabin. Flag did not
follow, but closed the door and waited within shouting
distance. Before leaving, Marlowe caught his eye but that
told him nothing--of course neither would say anything
in front of the marines.
  Ketterer, now alone in the cabin, motioned
Struan to be seated. "On the one hand may I
congratulate you," he said with grim formality and
put out his hand.
  "Thank you, sir." Struan shook hands,
finding the Admiral's grip firm but his palm
soft. "And on the other?"
  "On the other it seems you are going to have your work
cut out to keep your promises."
  "Sir?"
  "You seem to have stirred up a snake pit of
venom amongst your fellows. Sir William is
besieged with complaints."
  "As I said, I'll do my best."
  "You must do more than that, Mr. Struan."
  "Sorry, but what does that mean,
Admiral?"
  "It means nothing more or less than what you've
already promised to do."
  In the small silence, Struan decided not
to be overpowered, or crushed, or to lose sight
of the fact that this man had made his marriage
possible--no, not possible, he corrected himself,
had "allowed" it to be possible. John
Marlowe had had the balls to take the
initiative. "Captain Marlowe's not in any
trouble is he?"
  "Captain Marlowe is subject to Naval
Regulations."
  "Yes, naturally, but I believe he married
us within Naval Regulations, sir. I read the
paragraph meticulously beforehand, and there was no
age limit or mention of ages."
  "Regulations also state that any such marriage
is subject to immediate review if feasible. In
this case it is."
  "So I'm married but not, is that what you are
saying?"
  "I merely point out, Mr. Struan, as in
all matters in the Navy, unusual happenings
are subject to review."
  Struan forced a smile. "Correctly so.
My ..." He almost used "reading," but
judiciously changed the word. "... My understanding
of the order, sir, gave him permission."
  Ketterer raised an eyebrow. "Captain
Marlowe showed you a sealed order from me to him?"
  "As I understood it, sir, the order gave him
a qualified permission, sir--I confess I
went out of my way to ask for the exact wording, and
to persuade him that was the case."
  "I rather thought you would," the Admiral said
dryly.
  "Then it was a qualified permission?"
  "My order was stated clearly: If you should
ask a peculiar favor, he might grant it
if he wished. Last night, didn't you
mention something about wanting to go out of sight of land?
Your peculiar request might have been only
that--his orders were to do his trials within sight of the
flagship."
  Struan was trying hard to keep his balance,
feeling the coals of disaster beneath him. "Yes sir.
Yes, you might have thought that. If there was any
misunderstanding it was mine not Captain Marlowe's."
  "I'll note that, Mr. Struan."
  Malcolm had been watching the older man
carefully and listening even more carefully, wanting
to discern where the Admiral was heading, now afraid
that this was a continuation of the cat-and-mouse game. Am
I again in his claws--and will never be out of them?
  "May I ask, Admiral, why you gave
Captain Marlowe even a perhaps qualified
permission that certainly I may have
misconstrued?" Struan kept his face clear,
not forgetting he was married until the ceremony was
declared illegal. "I never thought you would, last
night."
  In the night Ketterer had been beset with
Consuela. "Give the young senhor a chance,
Charles," she had said with that lovely, liquid
accent, as sensual in memory as the depth of her
brown eyes in life. "We were never given one,
why not give him one--remember, you were not much
older than him. You have from him a giant step
forward, surely he will keep his promise. Why
not be generous--as our parents and your foul
Admiralty, were not? He is so much in love,
Charles, like you were, but unlike you, the young
senhor has already been dealt a cruel hand at the
whim of God ..."
  He had awakened, her words sounding in his ears,
the way she pronounced his name still tugging at his
heart after all the years. But this isn't the same,
he had thought, hardening his heart. The Struans are
opium smugglers and gunrunners--I will not forget
my dead sailors. Sorry, my long lost
love, the marriage will be declared illegal immediately
--Struan will not be allowed off the hook. Duty
is duty.
  Now, looking at Struan, remembering the way
he had hobbled in, determined to appear strong when
Hoag and Babcott had both confirmed
privately the youth was almost constantly in pain,
doubting if he would ever run, or ride comfortably
again, remembering, Unlike you ... at the whim
of God.
  He sighed. "A sudden whim, Mr.
Struan," he said, deciding to be lenient,
"coupled with a belief that you will perform as promised."
He got up, her smile etched on the back of
his eyes, and went to the sideboard feeling
curiously young. "Sherry?"
  "Thank you." Struan started to stand, and wavered,
weak with relief at Ketterer's admission.
  "I'll bring it. Tio Pepe? Good.
Health!" They touched glasses. Ketterer took
a large swallow.
  "Listen, young man," he said, his voice
unusually quiet and kind, "I shall, of course,
consult Sir William and will prevail on him
to read Naval Regs. More than likely
Captain Marlowe's report will be accepted, after
due consideration--we must make sure our officers
are always aware of the consequences of independent
action, but he will not be "in trouble" as you put
it. This is to be another secret between us.
Understood?"
  "Yes sir. Thank you. I will do what I
promised." Struan took a deep breath.
"Then my marriage is legal?"
  "That depends on your point of view. As far
as I am concerned, the Navy is concerned, that is
my belief, therefore it should be in common law. As
far as your two Churches are concerned, and the
inevitable legal broadsides you will have to endure,
I suggest you both batten down your hatches and
prepare for the worst. Again congratulations, on the
one hand. My compliments to Mrs. Struan--
privately of course."
                                 
                 

  By sunset the news had spread throughout the
Settlement, Drunk Town and the Yoshiwara.
  Speculation had been immediate, noisy, and
argumentative as theories were put forth, for and against
such a marriage, some predicting the ceremony was
totally illegal, others angrily denying it, many
of the more quarrelsome traders--and all Drunk
Towners--using foul language, obscene
gestures, and bunched fists to support their
positions, while a few of the wiser said: "Ah,
the canny young bugger, so that's why he sucked up
to the Admiral! It was a deal! Clever--I'd do
the same if I was Struan. Now that he's got
her will he still be anti-opium, anti-armaments?
No way ..."
  With the new topics, several fights began in
Drunk Town and a bar burned down. Father Leo
was rumored to have had apoplexy and was now
prostrate in front of his altar, Reverend
Tweet, at this very moment, was supposed to be
raving at Sir William, and in the Club,
Lunkchurch and Grimm, inevitably on
opposing sides, had begun to battle and, as
usual, were tossed into the street.
  Malcolm and Angelique were in the cabin of
their launch. Ahead was their jetty and, holding
hands, they saw a boisterous group of
well-wishers that had gathered there, headed by Jamie
McFay. The promised bad weather had not
materialized, with only a sprinkle late afternoon.
The wind was still up, sky overcast, but this did not
dampen the welcoming uproar.
  "Here we go, Mrs. Struan," Malcolm
said, and hugged her. She kissed him, whispering,
"Yes, my darling husband, oh Malcolm, that
sounds so funny, strange, so marvelous. This
isn't a dream is it?"
  "No, though it feels the same to me."
  The cutter twisted in the chop, throwing them together
to more laughter, and swung alongside to cheers and
shouts, the neatest docking the Bosun had ever
made. "Lively on the ropes lads," he
ordered but there was no need as eager hands twisted the
towlines to bollards and sailors swarmed to help
them.
  "Congratulations, Tai-pan, Mrs.
Struan," Jamie shouted amidst cheers that reached
the interior of the Club across High
Street. At once the room emptied and everyone
began to gather, doffing their hats, even Mrs.
Lunkchurch and Mrs. Grimm amongst them,
equally festive.
  Gornt and Norbert Greyforth watched from the
upper windows of their building. Outside all
houses Chinese servants stood around popeyed and
samurai were collecting at the North Gate,
mystified. Ministers and their staffs were trickling out
of their Legations: Sir William, hard-faced,
flanked by a smiling Phillip Tyrer, and
Michaelmas Tweet, black-browed and
furious, Zergeyev beaming and cheering lustily,
Dmitri shouting congratulations waving an
American flag, and Seratard and Andr`e were
torn between elation that the marriage was now achieved,
and fury that they had not been consulted.
  "Andr`e, bring her in as soon as possible.
J@esus, the stupid gamin should have let us
into the secret--it's your job to control her!"
Seratard said with the side of his mouth,
enthusiastically waving back as Angelique
caught his eye and waved. "Struan must execute
a will conforming to the Code Napol@eon at once,
see to it! Only God knows what dirty
tricks William will try, for or against--whatever
he says our position is the marriage is
legal, but we must insist it conforms to French law!
Get Father Leo, he will conduct their proper
wedding next week ... Mon Dieu, look
at those cretins!"
  Angelique and Struan were being mobbed. With
increasing difficulty they tried to push a way through
the crowd, all of whom wanted to kiss the bride,
as their right, to be prevented by others, to more uproar.
  She began to panic. This heightened the tension of
those nearby. The crowd swirled and swamped her,
Struan using his sticks to fight to her side as
Jamie began shoving through roughly, someone threw a
punch, and an ugly skirmish began. Sir
William called out to the Marine sentries, "Go
and clear a way for them, hurry up for God's
sake or they'll be crushed!" The four men began
running. "Phillip, supervise them, and get
Struan into my office on the double."
  The Sergeant roared, "Hey, you lot!" and the
mob devil that sometimes appeared in a crowd for no
apparent reason was gone. Quietly and firmly
he began forcing a passage. "Behave yourselves,
give the lady room!" He was obeyed
as Struan reached her. "Are you all right,
Angel?"
  "Oh yes, love." Now that she had room her
panic had gone. She adjusted her hat. The
feather had been broken. "Look at that!"
  "Here let me help you," Tyrer said
importantly, waving others away. "You, go
on, move you've frightened her to death. Are you all
right, Angelique? Malcolm?"
  "Of course," Malcolm said. Now that she was
safe and he had his sticks, his happiness
returned and he shouted, "Thanks for welcoming
us! Drinks on the Noble House, the Club
bar's open and stays open until further
orders!"
  There was a general rush in that direction. Soon
only Malcolm, Angelique, McFay and
Phillip Tyrer remained. And the sour presence
of Michaelmas Tweet: "Mr. Struan, the
ceremony is completely not legal and I must
warn y--"
  "You may be right, Reverend, but I'm advised
to the contrary, sir," Struan said firmly, having
already devised a plan for Tweet, another for
Father Leo and another for Sir William.
"Nonetheless I believe there is a happy
solution. Perhaps you would come to my office at noon
tomorrow? The House of the Lord will be satisfied, sir,
you may rest assured!" Then he whispered
to Jamie, "Divert him," and to the others, "Head
for the office, fast as you can."
  They had to run the gauntlet of a few
stragglers and then Angelique hissed,
"Phillip, hurry!" She ran on ahead with
him to avoid Father Leo who was approaching from down
the street as fast as his bulk and his cassock would
allow. Once in the foyer, most of the staff lined
up there, Vargas in front, Chen smiling
glassily, she laughed nervously, "I didn't
want to have to talk to him!"
  "Why not?" Phillip was beaming. "You're
married and that's that--at least Sir William's
been spitting blood since he heard, cursing the
Navy, Ketterer, Marlowe--so I imagine you
are married but all I want to say is Congrats
and may I kiss the bride?" He did not wait
and kissed her like a brother, she hugged him and
breathed another sigh of relief.
  Struan came through the door with McFay.
"Lock it," he ordered. Helped
by Vargas, McFay obeyed, politely but
firmly shoving the few more persistent traders out and
slammed the bolt home as Father Leo strode
up, tried the handle, then hammered on the door as
though it was a cathedral portal.
  But no one paid any attention, all fleeing
into the office like a group of mischievous children where
they collapsed into the chairs. All except
Malcolm.
  "Champagne, Chen. Thank you, Vargas,
see you later," he said over congratulations, and
added to Chen, in Cantonese, "Open the wine,
little mealy-mouth."
  Jamie McFay shut the door and sank into the
last chair.
  "Ayeeyah," Malcolm said, bubbling like the
wine, "I didn't think it would be like this.
Phillip, thanks again for the good wishes, you too
Jamie, are you all right Angel?"
  "Yes, Mr. Struan, wonderful, thank
you."
  Tyrer said, "It's all marvelous news,
Malcolm, and by the way could you see Sir
William as soon as possible."
  The way he said it, so tentatively, so
matter-of-fact, when they all knew he had been
bellowed at, made a sudden silence which broke
apart as they all laughed hysterically.
  "Tomorrow afternoon, happily," Malcolm said.
  Their glasses were soon full and even more quickly
empty and again filled, conversation loud and not listened
to. The door eased open. Vargas signalled
McFay, then whispered to him.
  Jamie nodded. "I'll be there in a moment.
Tai-pan, can you excuse me? And there's a
message for Ang--for Mrs. Struan: Mr.
Seratard wants to add his congratulations
personally at the Legation, soon as possible and the
... the priest would like to see you both a moment."
  "Jamie, first finish your drink. Vargas send
word to Seratard we'll put him on top of the
list, but first tell Father Leo to be here tomorrow at
5:00 P.m., here, in my office." Vargas
vanished. Malcolm saw the shadow on
Angelique's face. "I'll see him,
Angel, you don't have to and by Sunday everything will be
calm, I promise. Everything's in control.
Soon as it's dark, we'll slip back aboard
the cutter."
  "Cutter? Why, Malcolm, what
on earth for?"
  "Another surprise, we're dining aboard
Prancing Cloud and staying the night, then tomorrow
there are more surprises, lots and lots, there's a
honeymoon to plan. We'll leave in an hour and
there's no need for you to change, I had Ah Soh
pack some clothes for you and they're already aboard."
To Jamie, "You have to leave? What's up?"
  "I'd made a date with Gornt and forgot
all about it in the excitement. He's waiting in
my anteroom. He asked Vargas to give you
both his congratulations, and Norbert's."
  "Thank him for me, but don't go for a
second."
  "Thank him for me too, Jamie,"
Angelique said.
  "Of course, Mrs. Struan." McFay was
trying to get used to sounding the words, finding it
difficult and artificial, the two words conjuring
up Tess Struan, and nowadays every time he thought
of her he became bilious. The moment he had
heard about the marriage, the reason for the Admiral
and Malcolm's letter to Guardian and last
night's announcement had become clear, even the
timing of the duel, dovetailed neatly.
  Married! Oh my God!
  The implications for Malcolm were immense. For
himself it did not matter now that he had made his
peace with Malcolm and with himself. He doubted if
he would ever have a peace with Tess Struan. Though
she was a fanatic Struan, at the same time she
had inherited her father's vindictiveness, his ruthless
need for revenge. He had witnessed it falling on
the Bosun in charge of the boat that had capsized,
drowning the twins and her second son. She had
had him charged with murder, demanding hanging. The
coroner had found him guilty of negligence,
causing manslaughter, and gave him the maximum
ten years, hard labor, in the Hong Kong
prison the man would never survive.
Negligent? Not really, McFay and most had
thought at the time, the storm sudden as happens that
season of the year, an unhappy accident. But she
was Tess Struan of the Noble House. The
Bosun's real mistake, he thought sadly, was
that he lived and the children died.
  "Angelique," Struan was saying, "why
don't you freshen up, I'm going to do the same and
we'll leave within the hour--I've just a few things
to settle with Jamie." They kissed and
she left. In Cantonese he told Chen he
should arrange hot water for his wife and for him, "then
we go aboard Prancing Cloud. Is everything
prepared?"
  "Yes Master."
  "Good, and you three better be quiet as bats,
and contented as pigs in shit like never before!"
To Tyrer, he added pleasantly in English,
"Phillip, you'll excuse us, won't you?
Starting tomorrow, there'll be major celebrations all
over, wedding feast and so on with formal invitations.
Please give Sir William my compliments,
and please don't mention we'll be aboard
Prancing Cloud tonight to anyone--even to Sir
William. I don't want any drunken
rowdies circling us all night, we want to be
private, all right?"
  "Quite understand, again congratulations." Tyrer was
happy to leave. He still had to see Hiraga
to finish another, curt dispatch for Tair@o
Anjo before he could cross the bridge
to Fujiko. After this morning's council of war between
Sir William and Seratard, aided by himself and
Andr`e, where final details of the forthcoming
bombardment and punitive Yedo campaign were
agreed, Andr`e had whispered: "Fujiko's
panting to see you, it's all arranged. She's
even insisting on serving you a Japanese feast so
arrive hungry and thirsty, but don't forget
to act tough."
  Now alone, some of Malcolm's fatigue
showed. "Jamie, pour me a glass would you?
Thanks. Everything's organized?"
  "For tonight, yes, and tomorrow, yes. Ah Tok and
Ah Soh are aboard with the trunks, Chen will go with
you and Mrs. Struan. As far as I know no one
except them, Strongbow, me, and now Phillip
know you'll sleep aboard Prancing Cloud."
  "Good. Phillip was a mistake, but never
mind," Malcolm said. "I got too
exuberant but it should be all right. He shouldn't
blab. What does Gornt want?"
  "Just to arrange final details." McFay
looked at him. "Shouldn't your marriage make a
difference now?"
  "It could. But unless Norbert apologizes,
it won't."
  "Gornt wanted a private word, if you had
a moment."
  "All right. Tell him that's all it
can be--and let me see him first, eh?"
  Gornt's friendliness filled the room.
To Malcolm he seemed like a very old comrade.
"Champagne?"
  "Thank you, Tai-pan. May I
congratulate you?"
  "You may. Health!"
  "And yours, suh."
  "Sorry but we have to be quick, tomorrow there'll be more
time, what's up?"
  "I wanted to tell you, privately, Mr.
Greyforth is going to accept your compromise tomorrow.
No duel."
  Struan smiled. "That's the best news I've
had ... no, the second best news I've had
all day!"
  "Yes." Gornt's face hardened. "If he
means it."
  "Eh?"
  "I think you should be ready for treachery. Sorry
to be a cold towel on a great day but I wanted
to warn you. I know he'll change his mind."
  Malcolm watched him, then nodded,
undisturbed. "With Norbert, and all the
Brocks we expect treachery for breakfast."
Their glasses touched. "Health--and wealth--and
happiness!"
  The room was warm for both of them, Malcolm
noticing a curiousness about him that he could not
divine. "You're still planning on tomorrow, giving me
the information I need?"
  "Oh yes." Gornt got up. "And my
contract?"
  "It's ready. My signature can be witnessed
tomorrow."
  "Thanks. Until tomorrow, and again
congratulations."
  Again Malcolm sensed more than saw a strange
humor in him. "You're looking forward to it as much
as I am."
  Gornt's eyes seemed to focus. "Yes.
It will be another great day, an ending and a beginning."

  Upstairs, Angelique was in front of her
mirror, seeing nothing, unconsciously tinkering
with the signet ring on her finger. She was alone for the
first time today, in the privacy of her own room with the
door locked, and the moment she sat down, the
clamor of truths and paradoxes had abruptly
possessed her: everything happening so
fast, married but never really expecting it, never that
way, not aboard a ship, hoping and praying but not
believing it possible so many barricades between them;
married but not in the sight of God, married to a
man I set my cap at, actively pursued,
and encouraged to pursue me; the man I adore but
have cheated--the rape not my fault, the casting out
necessary, the earrings the only way, the secrecy the
only means to protect my life but still a cheat--
this man, who loves me to oblivion, risking
all, I've stolen from, cheated, and go to my
marriage bed soiled and yet ...
  Three times, coming back ashore, I began
to tell him.
  That's not true, I began to tell him part, the
part about the earrings, but each time his elation overpowered
me and stopped me as he poured out truths about his
mother and her letters--and Skye and Father Leo and
English priest, the Admiral and Sir
William--how he had been blocked but in the end
he had won ... "I won, my beloved
wife. I won you and now no one can take you from
me ..."
  Embracing and rapturous tears in each other's
arms.
  As God is my witness, I know he would have
been destroyed had I begun, and once begun I
know the rest would have poured out. And then he would have
died, poor lovely man. For that's what he
is, truly, the most lovely man in my life.
I know now I do love him, equally--no one could
have tried so hard, casting so many barriers aside.
I love him and yet ...
  What must I do?
  She saw her face staring back at her. Not
liking to see herself so unguarded, her eyes
dropped. She saw her fingers twisting the ring, this
way and that, the way Andr`e did with his signet
ring. Malcolm's ring was gold, heavy, with the
ingraved Struan crest: the Lion of Scotland
entwined with the Dragon of China. Is that good with
evil? she asked herself and, suddenly, shivered.
  To divert herself she bushed her hair
vigorously but this did not help. Dark thoughts
soared back, faster, ever faster, all of them--and
him.
  It all became like a foul vomit ready to pour
out. She felt faint and pressed her hands against
her temples, "Don't ... you must be strong
... you must be strong, you're alone, you
must ..." Her moaning stopped as another thought
cleared the sick away. "But you're not
alone," she said aloud, "There are two of you
now, there's Malcolm and he needs you ... two
of you, you, and Malcolm, he needs you,
Malcolm who is your husband ..."
  This image moved around her mind, filling it, and
then she heard him calling from downstairs, so
joyously, "Angel, hurry, it's time to leave
... hurry!"
  Unhurried she went and knelt in front of the
little statue of the Blessed Virgin and gave all of
herself: "Mother of God, forgive this sinner. I have
sinned grieviously, I beg Thy forgiveness.
I have sinned grieviously, and live a lie, but
I swear I will be the best wife I can be, for as
long as I am permitted, for I love this man with
all my heart as I love Thee. ..."

  "How nice to see you, Raiko-chan,"
Meikin said with a smile, kneeling opposite
her. "It has been too long." She was
mama-san of the House of Wisteria and Koiko's
mistress and they were in Raiko's most private
sanctuary.
  "Yes, thank you, you honor me," Raiko
said, delighted to see her old friend, though more than
a little surprised that Meikin had responded with
such alacrity to her invitation for a business
discussion. "Please help yourself to some snacks, the
eel is particularly delicate. Sak`e or
gai-jin brandy?"
  "First sak`e, please." Meikin accepted it
from an attentive maid. Business must be good,
she thought, noting the expensive trappings of this
isolated, secure dwelling within the walls of the
Three Carp.
  "Though times are hard, happily gai-jin have
little idea of money values and, disgusting as they
may be, reapings are high and the cost of hot water
and clean towels and perfumes small." The two
women laughed, watched and waited.
  Meikin sampled the sushi--delicious--and
began eating hugely for such a small woman.
Her travelling kimono was deliberately
mediocre. Anyone seeing her would presume she
was a minor merchant's wife, not one of the richest
mama-sans in Yedo, owner of the city's most
expensive Pleasure House in the greatest
Yoshiwara in the land--recently
entirely rebuilt and refurbished after last
year's fire--mama-san to ten of the most gifted
geisha, twenty of the loveliest courtesans, as
well as contract owner of Koiko the Lily.
She looked around Raiko's most inner
sanctum, reserved for special occasions,
admiring the unique silks and cushions and
tatamis, chatting while she ate, wondering why
the request for a meeting.
  When food was finished, the maids dismissed,
Raiko poured two cups of her best brandy.
"Health and money!"
  "Money and health!" The quality of the liquor
was better than any Meikin possessed.
"Gai-jin have their good points."
  "In the world of wines and fortified spirits, yes,
not in their appendages," Raiko said, sagely.
"Please allow me to give you a bottle. One
of my clients is Furansu."
  "Thank you. I am glad business is so good,
Raiko-chan."
  "It could be better, always."
  "And Hinodeh?" Meikin asked--she owned
half her contract-price. When Hinodeh first
came to see her, she had placed the girl with a
cousin, the mama-san of another house she owned.
Later, by chance, she had heard of Raiko's
curious and highly unorthodox request for a
special kind of girl. It was easy to make the
arrangements--Raiko was an old friend, known over
the years and trusted over the years from the times they were
maiko, then courtesans together. "The arrangement
continues to be satisfactory?"
  "I have another payment for you though the man is
slow."
  Meikin laughed. "I am not surprised. You
are a marvelous negotiator." She bowed her
thanks.
  "He promises a larger amount in a few
days. Possibly more earrings."
  "Ah!" Meikin had disposed of the other set,
profitably. "This had been a most
satisfactory business." The client's down
payment on Hinodeh's contract had been more than
enough to carry all costs for at least a year. "How
is she?"
  Raiko related the first and subsequent
meetings to the other woman's breathless interest.
  "She's correct to call him the Beast,"
Meikin said.
  "He is not a bad man. I think this disease
must send him mad from time to time. At least she knows
the worst, and accepts that he is her karma."
  "May I ask, there are no, no signs
yet?"
  "No, nothing. But every day she makes me
examine the parts she cannot see herself or with a
mirror."
  "Strange, Raiko-chan." Meikin settled
a hair comb more comfortably. "When, and if, anything
appears that cannot be hidden--will she seek the
knife?"
  Raiko shrugged. "One never knows for certain."
  "Has she told you why she accepted this
karma?"
  "No. Nothing. I like her and can help only a
little. Yes, strange she will not tell us, neh?"
Raiko sipped her brandy, captivated by the heat
that slid inside, and the rare pleasure of entertaining
her oldest and most trusted friend. They had been
inseparable while maiko, lovers in their youth and
exchanged confidences always--safe confidences.
"Tonight he visits her. If you wish you can watch
them for a while."
  Meikin chuckled. "I am long past being
interested or excited by the thrashings of others,
violent or passionate--even by well-endowed
gai-jin." She was too happy to be with her old
friend to tell the sadness of Gekko and Shin
Komoda that she had insisted on knowing before sending
her here.
  When Hinodeh is dead, Raiko-chan, I will
tell you and we can share a tear for the sorrows we
women must endure. Until then Hinodeh's
secret is safe as we agreed, the name of her
son safe, and where he was sent.
  A glow went through her, loving secrets and the
game of life. "So Hinodeh is settled.
Good. And now?"
  "Now." Raiko dropped her voice. "I
might have important information about gai-jin
battle plans."
  Color rushed into Meikin's cheeks and she
became as tense as the other woman had become.
"Against Yedo?"
  "Yes."
  "That might be valuable information but, so sorry,
it would be dangerous knowledge--perilous."
  "Yes, and even more dangerous to dispose of, though
highly valuable to the correct
person."
  Meikin touched away a droplet of brandy that
could have been perspiration. "And once such knowledge is
bought, proved correct, or incorrect, heads
have a habit of falling."
  "True." Raiko understood the danger but she
was more excited than she had been in years. She
had never been in the mainstream of Yedo
politics, but the proximity of Hiraga and
learning about the shishi from him--and secrets about him
and Ori from the shoya--had given her an
appetite. That and her relationship with
Furansu-san, through him learning about gai-jin,
paradoxically the source of all her wealth at the
same time the enemy of their sacred Land of the
Gods. That and because disgust with the Bakufu and Anjo
who had murdered another old friend, Yuriko,
mama-san of the Forty-seven Ronin, for harboring
shishi.
  She trembled at the thought of her own head
adorning a spike, in fear but in ecstasy.
Yuriko was already immortalized in the ukiyo-every
prints of the Floating World, her name the new
favorite of geishas, and soon there would even be
a Noh play with her as heroine.
  "You are right," she whispered, "but certain
information might be worth the risk. And if ... if
I had important secret knowledge of what ... of
what high officials were secretly planning against
the gai-jin, I might be able to place it also to our
mutual advantage." Sweat had gathered at the
edge of her elaborate wig. She brushed it
away with a tiny pink paper tissue. "It is
hot, neh?"
  "Not so hot as the fire we might put ourselves
into."
  "What would the beginning day of the attack be worth
--and the gai-jin battle plan?" This morning
Furansu-san had given her more than enough
details to tempt even the most skeptical
buyer to be lavish.
  Meikin felt her heart thumping. She had
hoped that Raiko's invitation would be for something like
this. Over the last two years she had nurtured and
obliquely hinted at the potential, prompted
by Sensei Katsumata for whom any gai-jin
intelligence was of value. And also because,
recently, there had been covert instructions to all
Bakufu spies with promises of rich rewards
to focus on Yokohama, to discover
gai-jin secrets, and who was feeding the enemy
forbidden information about things Japanese. That
Raiko had made the first open move was crucial
--in truth the only person she herself would trust
in such a gangrenous game. "How soon is the
attack to be?"
  "Would it be possible to have some important
secret for the gai-jin as part of the trade?"
  Meikin sat back and thought long and hard.
  Yes, Raiko was to be trusted, completely--
until her life was threatened. Yes, a channel
for intelligence on a continuing basis would be
valuable not only in money but also to the cause--
sonno-joi--that she supported with all her being.
And yes because it could be used to supply gai-jin with
carefully conceived false information as well.
  She said softly, "Raiko, old friend, I have
no doubt Tair@o Anjo, or Yoshi would
pay dearly to know those dates, amongst other
details, but, ah so sorry, how to place it in
either of their hands and the money in ours without compromising
either of us, that is the difficulty."
  "Brandy, Meikin-chan?" Raiko poured,
weak with excitement. "If anyone could solve such
a riddle it is you."
  The two women measured each other and smiled.
"Perhaps."
  "Yes. And now perhaps that is enough for the moment. We
can continue later, or tomorrow if it pleases you.
May I plan your evening's entertainment, unless
you are tired?"
  "Thank you. No, I am not tired. The ferry
from Yedo was comfortable and not at all full, the sea
fair and my servants made sure the captain
granted my slightest wish." Meikin had
arrived at the village jetty just before
nightfall. "May I ask what you suggest?"
  "We have geisha, but not up to your standards. There
are some youths who might prove adequate."
Raiko's eyes crinkled with her smile,
remembering the good times they had when they were young.
"Or perhaps a maiko?"
  Meikin chuckled and sipped her brandy. "That
would be a pleasant diversion and would remind me of
old times, Raiko-chan. She will help me
think, help me see if I can provide you with
what we need. Good. I agree we have had enough
seriousness for now. Let us talk of olden days and
how business is, and how is your son?"
  "He is well, still climbing the
Gyokoyama ladder."
  "May I put in a good word with them--though
surely unnecessary. An excellent bank, the
best, I get the highest interest and my
deposits are spread for safety--famine is
coming so I have bought future rice heavily. Your
son, he would be twenty-four now, neh?"
  "Twenty-six. And your daughter?"
  "Thank all gods rich and poor, I
successfully married her to a goshi so her children are
samurai, she already has one son, but eeee, her
husband is expensive!" Meikin shook her head
from side to side, then laughed. "But I should not
complain, I only convert the worthless dribbles of a
few rich old men into a heritage we never
dreamed possible. Neh?"
  The sound of footsteps mingled with their laughter.
A tap on the shoji. "Mistress?"
  "Yes, Tsuki-chan?"
  The maiko slid the door aside a crack
and, on her knees, peered up at them with an
innocent smile. "So sorry, but Shoya
Ryoshi, the village Elder, begs to see you and
your guest."
  Raiko's eyebrows arced. "My guest?"
  "Yes, Mistress."
  Meikin frowned. "Does he usually greet
visitors?"
  "Only the most important and no doubt you
are most important, your presence honors us
all. Certainly he would have been told of your
arrival. His web of informants is far-reaching,
Meikin-chan, he is absolutely to be trusted
--and also head of the Gyokoyama in Yokohama.
Shall we see him?"
  "Yes, but only for a moment. I will pretend a
headache then we can continue our chat until the
evening meal."
  "Little one," Raiko ordered, "bring the shoya
here, but first tell maids to bring fresh tea and
hot sak`e--and to take these glasses away and
hide my brandy. Meikin-chan, if he knew
I had such a source he would be a daily pest!"
  It was quickly done and the table made clean and
perfect, their breath cleansed with herbs, before he was
bowed in. "Please excuse me, Ladies,"
he said with untoward anxiety, kneeling and bowing and
being bowed to. "Please excuse my bad
manners arriving without an appointment but I
wanted to bow to such an august person and
welcome her to my village."
  Both were surprised that he appeared so forbidding,
for this was not a serious occasion. Meikin had never
met him before but her own Gyokoyama official
had mentioned him and that he was a man of integrity,
so her reply was as polite and enthusiastic as
befitted an eminent person from the biggest city in
the world, complimenting him on the state of the
Yoshiwara, and the little she had seen of the village.
"You are a man of great reputation, shoya."
  "Thank you, thank you."
  "Tea, or sak`e?" Raiko asked.
  He hesitated, began to talk, stopped. The
mood in the room changed. Raiko spoke into the
silence. "Please excuse me, shoya, but what
is the matter?"
  "So sorry ..." He turned to Meikin,
"So sorry, Lady, you are a most cherished
client for our company. I, I ..." Shakily
he reached into his sleeve and handed her the little
piece of paper. She squinted at it. "What
is it? What does it say? I cannot read writing
so small."
  "It's a carr ... carrier pigeon
message." The shoya tried to speak again, could not,
numbly pointing at the paper.
  Jolted, Raiko took it and moved to the
light. Her eyes scanned the tiny writing. She
blanched, wavered almost fainting, and sank to her
knees. "It says, An assassination
attempt on Lord Yoshi at dawn at
Hamamatsu village failed. Lone shishi
assassin slain by him. Lady Koiko also dead
in skirmish. Inform House of Wisteria our great
sadness. More information soon as possible. Namu
Amida Butsu ..."
  Meikin had gone sallow. She mouthed,
Koiko dead?
  "It must be a mistake," Raiko cried out in
anguish, "Must be! Koiko dead? When did it
happen? There's no date! Shoya, how did you
... It must be lies, must be lies ..."
  "So sorry, the date is in code at the
top," he mumbled. "This happened yesterday, near
dawn. The Tokaid@o way station,
Hamamatsu. No mistake, Lady, oh no,
so sorry."
  "Namu Amida Butsu! Koiko?
Koiko's dead?"
  Meikin looked at her blankly,
tears pouring down her cheeks, and fainted.
  "Maids!"
  They came running and brought smelling salts and
cold towels and ministered to her and to Raiko as she
tried to collect herself, groping to discover how this
would affect her. For the first time she was uncertain if
Meikin was now to be trusted or had become a
hazard to be avoided.
  The shoya knelt motionlessly. It had been
necessary, and was still necessary for him to pretend to be frightened
and aghast to be the bringer of bad tidings, but he was
glad to be alive to witness these amazing
happenings.
  He had not given them the second slip of
paper. It was private to him and in code and read:
Assassin was Sumomo. Koiko believed
to be implicated in plot, wounded with shuriken,
then beheaded by Yoshi. Prepare to close Meikin
accounts. Avoid mentioning Sumomo. Guard
Hiraga as a national treasure, his information is
invaluable. Press him for more, his family is being
refinanced as agreed. We urgently require
gai-jin war plans at whatever cost.
  The moment he had received the message he had
checked his books for Meikin's accounts that his
branch owed her, even though he knew the amount to the
hundredth part of a bronze coin. No need
to worry. When she was moved onwards by Lord
Yoshi, or if she wriggled out of the trap, either
way the bank would profit. If she failed,
another mama-san would take her place--they would
use her residual wealth to sponsor the
replacement. The Gyokoyama monopolized
all Yoshiwara banking--an immense and
permanent source of revenue.
  How ironic life is, he thought, wondering
what these two would think if they knew the reason for
Gyokoyama's unbreakable hold. One of the most
inner secrets of their zaibatsu was that their founder
was not only a mama-san, but a woman of
genius.
  In the early 1600's, with the enthusiastic
approval of Sh@ogun Toranaga, she
designed a walled district where, in future,
all of Yedo's Pleasure Houses, high and
low, had to conduct their business exclusively--
at that time brothels were spread all over the city--
calling it the Yoshiwara, the Place of Reeds,
after the area Toranaga had allocated to her.
Next she created a new class of
courtesan, geisha, those trained and qualified
in the arts, who were not, routinely, available for
pillowing.
  Then she began moneylending, concentrating on
Yedo's Yoshiwara, soon to spread her
tentacles to all others as they were institutionalized
throughout the land, Sh@ogun Toranaga wisely
having foreseen that in such districts the purveyors,
and their clients, would be more easily monitored, and
taxed.
  Lastly, incredible in those days, somehow or
another--no one still knew how--she persuaded
Sh@ogun Toranaga to make her eldest son
samurai. In short order her other sons
prospered: in shipbuilding, as rice dealers,
sak`e and beer makers, their descendants today
owners or silent controllers of a vast network of
businesses. In a few years she obtained
permission for the samurai branch to take the name
Shimoda. Now the Shimoda were hereditary
daimyo of the small but affluent fief of the same
name, in Izu. It was she who coined the inscription
over the Yoshiwara gateway: Lust cannot
wait, it must be satisfied. She was
ninety-two when she died. Her mama-san name
Gyoko, Lady Luck.
  "Shoya," Meikin said between broken sobs,
"please advise me what I should do, please."
  "You must wait, Lady, be patient and
wait," he said hesitantly, still wearing his mask
of disquiet, noticing, at once, though the sobs
were loud and heartbreaking, her eyes were more pitiless
than he had ever seen them.
  "Wait? Wait for what? Of course wait but
what else?"
  "We, we do not yet know, know all the
details, Lady, what happened. So sorry,
but is there a chance the Lady Koiko would be part
of the plot?" he asked, twisting a knife in the
ready wound for the sake of twisting it. Though
Gyokoyama had no proof, Meikin was
suspected of dangerous sonno-joi affiliations
and a connection with the Raven--against their oblique
warnings--another reason why she had been advised
to buy rice futures, not only as a wise
investment but also as a bank-controlled hedge against
her being accused and condemned.
  "Koiko in a plot? My beauty, my
treasure? Of course not," Meikin burst out.
"Of course not."
  "Meikin-san, when Lord Yoshi returns,
surely as her mama-san, he will send for you. In
case, so sorry, in case enemies have whispered
against you, it would be wise to have ... to have ready
tokens of ... of your respect."
  There was no reason for either woman to ask, What
enemies? Success bred jealousy and secret
hatreds everywhere--particularly in best friends--and in
the Floating World, a world of women, more than
anywhere. And both were successful.
  Meikin was over her initial shock now, her
mind concentrating on means of escape--in case
Yoshi suspected, or Koiko had denounced
her, or he had proof that both she and Koiko
supported sonno-joi, shishi, and knew
Katsumata. There was no real way to escape,
not into another identity or to another place,
Nippon was too well compartmentalized. Throughout the
land, ten family heads formed the basic unit
responsible for their own behavior and obedience
to law, ten of these units formed another grouping
equally responsible, ten of these the same and so
on, up to the ultimate giver of law: the
daimyo.
  So she could run nowhere, hide nowhere. "What
could I possibly give the great Lord Yoshi?"
she asked her voice hoarse, feeling sicker
than ever before.
  "Perhaps, perhaps information."
  "What kind of information?"
  "I do not know, so sorry," he said with
pretended sadness. Tomorrow could be different, tonight he
must still pretend, to give them face, whatever he
thought of their stupidity. Stupid to embrace
sedition with a penis, particularly when the shishi
possessors were few, most were being scattered or
killed, and they continued to commit the unforgivable sin:
failure. "I do not know, Lady, but Lord
Yoshi must be worried, greatly worried what the
vile gai-jin fleet will do. They prepare for
war, neh?"
  The moment he said it he saw Meikin's eyes
become even more flinty and fix on Raiko who
flushed slightly. Ah, he thought gleefully,
they already know--and so they should, bedding the loathsome
gai-jin! By all gods if there be gods, what
they know the Gyokoyama should of course be told
quickly.
  "That news might--would ease his pain," he
said, nodding wisely as a banker would.
"And yours."

  Half a hundred paces away in a dwelling
within the walls, snuggled into gardens, Phillip
Tyrer was sitting cross-legged, bathed,
replete with food and sak`e, naked under his
yokata and in a state of rapture. Fujiko
knelt behind him, her knowing hands massaging his neck
muscles, finding the points of pleasure-pain.
She wore a sleeping yukata, her hair
loosened and now she moved closer, delicately
bit the lobe of his ear, near the center, where the
erotic sites lay. Her tongue increased his
pleasure dramatically.
  Fingers slid sensuously to his shoulders, never
slowing, taking away his cares, the conferences with
Sir William and Seratard, helping his chief
to deal with that Frenchman and his constant, inbred
devious attempts to gain a minuscule
advantage when, let's face it, he had thought,
the slimy rotter has only two mediocre
ships when we have a fleet of ships-of-the-line,
crewed by men, not sycophants!
  Taking notes and then setting out two
alternate battle plans into correct
diplomatic English and French for their
governments, and into more ordinary orders for the
Admiral and General to carry out, the time slipping
away and his headache growing. But Andr`e had been
an asset at the morning meeting, well
prepared, and all the time suggesting ideas and
dates, maneuvering the two principals
into agreeing and making decisions, all four of them
sworn to secrecy.
  Then, at last, slipping out of the Legation and
across the bridge, knocking on the door,
instantly opened by Raiko herself and being bowed in and
through the garden and bathed and fed but before that Raiko had
at last begun to treat him as an important
official should be treated.
  About bloody time, he thought, more than a little
pleased, every nerve tuned to Fujiko's fingers ...
  Most of her mind was concentrated on Raiko's
warning: "Some vile and hungry low-class
person at the Lily has seduced our gai-jin
lord away from us. At great cost I have tempted
him here, granting many concessions to go-betweens. Do not
fail tonight, this may be your last chance to bind him to us
with ropes of silk. Use every trick, every
technique ... even the Moon behind the
Mountain."
  Fujiko flinched. She had never tried this before,
even in the most heated embrace. Never mind, she
told herself stoically, better a few queer
moments of eccentric behavior--than no gai-jin
pay tonight, and no pay for a year of leisure.
  As her fingers moved closer and her soft
murmurs began, daydream pictures of her
farmhouse began to intrude, the children, her fine
husband and their ripening fields of rice, so grand
and kind and ...
  Firmly she put them away.
  Until the client is asleep, she ordered
herself.
  Tonight you will snare the ungrateful dog forever!
It's a matter of face for the whole of the House
of the Three Carp! Waylaid by a low-class
person from the Lily?
  Ugh!

                 

  The clipper Prancing Cloud swung at
anchor with a change in the evening tide. "She's
snug, sir," the First Mate said. Captain
Strongbow nodded and continued puffing his pipe.
  They were on the quarterdeck. Wind creaked the
spars and blocks above. Strongbow was a clear
eyed, thick, tough man of fifty. "It'll be a
fair night, Mister, crisp but not cold." He
smiled, adding softly, "Good for our guests,
eh?"
  The First Mate, as tall and tough and weathered but
half his age, was watching them too and grinned.
"Aye aye sir."
  Angelique and Malcolm were on the main
deck below, leaning on the gunnel close together,
staring at the lights of Yokohama. Malcolm
wore a topcoat over casual shirt and
trousers and soft shoes, and had, for the first time, without
too much discomfort, used only one stick while
aboard. She wore a heavy red shawl around her
shoulders and over a long loose dress. They were
near a deck cannon. The ship carried ten
thirty-pounders, port and starboard, and bow and stern
chasers and their gunners were as good as any in the
Navy. That was Strongbow's boast. It did not
apply to all their clippers or merchantmen or
steamers.
  "Pretty, isn't it, my darling
wife?" Malcolm said, genuinely happy for one
of the few times in his life.
  "Tonight everything in the world is pretty, mon
amour," she said, nestling closer. It was after
dinner and they were waiting until the stateroom, the
cabin they were occupying, was cleared of dishes and
prepared. The cabin was large and used the whole of the
stern, normally the Captain's quarters, unless the
tai-pan was aboard--one of the many laws laid
down by Dirk Struan, thirty years ago, the
fleet still governed by his dictates to the last
detail: best pay, cleanliness, training, and
fighting readiness.
  Strongbow was watching the tide, gauging it. In
these waters a change in the tide could herald the
coming, hours later, of a tsunami, a giant
wave generated maybe a thousand miles away by a
sub-ocean earthquake that would engulf anything in
its path at sea, and coastal cities when it
hit land.
  When he felt that the shift had been normal,
he looked back at Struan. He was glad to have
him aboard, and new orders to sail early tomorrow with
all speed for Hong Kong, knowing, as they all
knew, Herself had commanded the young man home weeks
ago. But he was troubled to be carrying the girl.
  My God, damned if I can call her
Mrs. Struan--there's only one of them, he was
thinking. Young Malcolm married? In spite of
Her orders? In spite of Her opposition?
He must be daft! Is the marriage legal?
By sea law, yes, if they were adults but they're
not. Will it be overturned? A broken penny to a
golden guinea She'll have twenty ways to null
it without as much as a how'd'you do! Christ!
  What about the girl then? What will happen to her?
And young Malcolm? How in the hell can he win
against Her? I'm glad I wasn't the one who
married them, thank God for that. Would I if
he'd asked me? Not on your Nelly! Never!
  Herself will spit blood, right about them being under
age, and about her being Catholic. It's going
to cause a battle royal, this time mother against
son, a fight to the death with no rules and we all
know she's a hellcat when aroused--worse than
my Cat--though young Malcolm's changed, tougher
than I've ever seen him, more determined than
he's ever been. Why? Because of the girl? Only
God knows, but it'd be a welcome change to have a
proper tai-pan again, a man.
  No doubt in the world young Malcolm's
overboard for her and who's to blame him? Not me!
I'd wed her myself given the chance but, by God,
this's one time I'm not going to hurry to report
in, to rush off to drink and bed my Cat. He
chuckled. Cat was his mistress of years, a
Shanghainese girl whose temper and jealousy was
legend but whose passion had no rival.
  "What about our change of orders, sir?"
  Strongbow shrugged. Certainly no need for
Malcolm to rush ashore before dawn to rush back
again, not with his walking so badly--one stick or
two, never mind. Any problems, things to sign,
could be brought aboard by McFay. Ah yes
Jamie, what's he hiding? Something smelly--
why else the secrecy and all shore leave
cancelled for the crew?
  He had heard rumors of an impending duel.
Just the sort of damn fool escapade Struan
pride would precipitate, then to deal with it before
leaving, anything to humble the Brocks when everyone
knows we should be making a peace, the feud's gone
on too long, they're in the ascendance and they've
got our noses jammed in the bucket. Will we be
flying their flag come Christmas? By God, I
hope not.
  The young idiot doesn't take after his father but his
grandfather. Christ, what a man! Strongbow had
sailed with him several times, trading opium up the
China coast as midshipman, then gunner's
mate, then as Third Mate under Stride
Orlov the Hunchback--Master of the clipper
fleet after the tai-pan.
  He saw Malcolm put his arm around the girl
and she pressed even closer and his heart went out
to them. Tough growing up, tough to be tai-pan, or
almost tai-pan of the Noble House, with such a
grandfather--and such a mother. Pointedly he moved across
the quarterdeck and looked seawards. The First
Mate followed. Both gazed up into the shrouds as
a few of the resting sea birds changed perches,
cawing. Then one dipped off the top gallant
spars and they watched him vaporize into the dark for
night fishing. Another followed as silently.
  Malcolm and Angelique had not moved, lost
in their serenity. The half hour sand timer on the
bridge emptied. At once the duty watch
turned it and rang six bells, 11:00
P.m., echoed by other vessels in the bay. They
came out of their reverie. "Time to go below,
Angel?"
  "Soon now, beloved. Chen said he'd tell us
when our cabin's ready." She had thought about that ever
since he had said, "How would you like to be married
today ..." She smiled and kissed his chin,
prepared, and at peace. "Hello, my darling
husband, we're going to have such a wonderful life,
I promise, no more pain for you and fitter than
ever before. Promise?"
  "A thousand times ... my darling wife."
  More sea birds dipping from the rigging, and Chen
came up and said everything was as the tai-pan had
ordered.
  Malcolm added in Cantonese, "Remember
now, don't wake tai-tai when you wake me."
Tai-tai meant Supreme of the Supreme,
First Wife--who was supreme and ultimate law
inside any Chinese household, as the Husband
was supreme outside.
  "Sleep well, Master, ten thousand sons,
Missee."
  "Tai-tai," Malcolm said, correcting
him.
  "Ten thousand sons, tai-tai."
  "What was that about, Malcolm?" she asked,
smiling.
  "He was wishing you a happy marriage."
  "Doh jeh, Chen,"--thank you, she
said.
  Chen waited until they had bid the officers
good night, and were below--Malcolm using one stick,
leaning on her. Ayeeyah, he thought, going forward
to the fo'c'sle gangway, all gods great and
small, protect the Master and give him a
night worth all the pain--past and future--but
first consider me and my problems and explain
to Illustrious Chen and tai-tai Tess this
marriage was nothing to do with me.
  From the quarterdeck Strongbow watched Chen go
below. "They're all bedded down? The servants?"
  "We put hammocks in the starboard sail
room. They'll be snug unless we run into a
storm."
  "Good. You want to have your tea now, Mister?"
  "Yes, thanks, I'll be back smartly."
Tonight the First Mate had the midnight to 4:00
A.m. watch and he ran down the gangway
lightly. At the stern end of the corridor was the
state room. The door was closed. He heard the
bolt slide home. Smiling,
silently whistling a gig, he headed for the
galley.

  Malcolm was leaning against the door, aching with
anticipation, determined to walk unaided to his
marriage bed. She had stopped near the bunk and
was looking back at him. The stateroom was well
ordered. And warm. The big dining table and sea
chairs secured to the deck. So was the roomy
bunk, easily enough for two, another of the
tai-pan's laws. It was high and its headboard
centered against the stern bulkhead, with roped canvas
guards against the tilt of the decks when reaching
to windward, or tacking under full canvas. Now
these were sheathed. Port was a small bathroom and
toilet. Sea chest for clothes to starboard. From the
beams a gimballed oil lamp cast pleasing
shadows.
  Both of them hesitated, unsure.
  "Angel?"
  "Yes, ch@eri?"
  "I love you."
  "I love you, too, Malcolm. I'm so
happy."
  Still neither moved. Her shawl had fallen away
slightly to reveal her shoulders and the pale green,
high-waisted Empire-style dress, the folds
of soft silk gathered under her bosom that rose and
fell in time with the beating of his heart. The dress was
the most advanced haute couture from the latest
L'Illustration that Colette had sent, not yet
in full favor, daring in its simplicity. When
she had appeared at dinner, Strongbow their guest,
despite themselves, both men had gasped.
  Her eyes were mirrors of his and now, unable
to bear the waiting and his need that seemed to reach out and
envelope and smother her, she hurried into his arms.
Passionately. Her shawl dropped unnoticed
to the deck.
  A little dizzy, she murmured, "Come along,
ch@eri," and took his hand--and part of his weight
--said another silent prayer for help,
annihilated the past and the future, abandoning herself
to the present, she led him to the bunk--resolved
to be all that he desired and expected. Ever
since today's sudden and unbelievable ceremony she
had been planning for this moment, her role, sifting
her own ideas and what Colette had whispered how
some of the great ladies of the court conducted themselves
on the first night: "It's
important, Angelique, to be the guide,
to control the stallion as a good rider should, with
strong hands and tight rein, with firmness but
gentleness to remove the initial violence from even
the most docile of husbands--to lessen the hurt.
Be prepared ..."
  His impatience was vast, big hands wandering,
lips stronger. "Let me help you," she said
huskily, also wanting to begin, and eased the coat
off and then the shirt and flinched when she saw the
extent of the scar at his waist.
  "Mon Dieu, I'd forgotten how badly
you've been hurt."
  His passion went. But not the thundering of his heart.
Every instinct made him want to pull the shirt or
sheet around him but he forced himself not to. The scar
was a fact of his life. "Sorry."
  "Don't be sorry, mon amour," she
said, her eyes spilling, and holding him close,
"I'm sorry, so sorry for you and all that
horror ... so sorry."
  "Don't, my darling. It's joss. Soon
it'll only be a bad dream, all of it, for both
of us, I promise."
  "Yes, my darling, so sorry, so silly of
me," she said, still holding on to him and, in a
moment, when the anguish for him had lessened,
angry at herself for her lapse, she brushed away
her tears--and with them her momentary sadness--kissed
him quickly, pretending it had never happened.
"Sorry, my darling, how silly of me! Sit
there for a moment." He obeyed.
  Watching him with veiled but shining eyes, she
undid the silk belt and then the back buttons
and let the gown fall as she had planned. Only
a half-slip and pantaloons remained. He
reached for her but she chuckled and slid away and
went to the sea chest where her mirror and salves and
perfumes were, and, taking her time, put perfume
behind her ears and then on each breast, teasing and
tantalizing.
  But he did not mind, consumed with her, enchanted,
for she had explained many times, in different words,
"We French are different from you, my darling
Malcolm, we are open about loving, modest but not
modest, so opposite to the English. We
believe loving should be like a marvelous meal, one
to thrill the senses, all senses, and not the way
our poor English sisters, and their brothers, are
taught: that it should be done quickly, in the
dark, believing somehow the act is squalid and
bodies shameful. You'll see, when we're
married ..."
  And now they were. She was his wife, she was
coquettish for his delight and he was filled with
joy and pulsating. Thank God for that, he thought,
monumentally relieved--he had worried for
weeks, reliving the Yoshiwara girl, when nothing
had worked. "Angel," he said throatily.
  Shyly she stepped out of her pantaloons and
slip and walked over to the gimballed lamp and
turned the wick down, leaving just enough light, more
strikingly lovely than he had imagined--the
sight of her naked body was like a dream, and at the
same time achingly, vividly real. Without hurry
she climbed into the other side of the bunk and lay
alongside him.
  Whispering words of love, hands touching,
exploring, his breathing heavy, moving closer,
breath catching painfully when he moved, lips
hot and kisses passionate. Her own hands
tentative, carefully controlled, all her mind
concentrated on the picture of happy, innocent
first love that she wanted him to have of her--
desperate to please but a little frightened.
  "Oh Malcolm, oh Malcolm ..."
Murmuring and kissing him deeply, loving him--
praying that what Babcott had said in answer to her
questions, "Don't worry, for a time he
won't be able to ride comfortably, or dance a
polka brilliantly, but that doesn't matter,
he can drive a coach-and-four, captain a ship,
run the Noble House, sire many children--and be the
best husband ever ..."
  Her need for him was strong now. But she
modulated it, checking her own desire, sticking
to the plan, helping and guiding and then a sharp
gasp, never wavering, now holding him tightly,
reacting and reacting until so soon he cried
out, her whole body rocked by the contortions of his
release and cries that went on and on and then his
helpless, panting, dead weight crushing her--but not
crushing her.
  How odd that I can bear his weight so easily,
everything fitting together, she thought, her mouth whispering
sweet and tender words, soothing his panting
whimpers, content that their first joining had been
accomplished so pleasingly.
  He was half conscious, lost in some strange
plateau, weightless, empty, feeling
nothing yet sated with love for this incredible
creature who, nude, was all that he imagined and
more. The smell and taste and being of her. Every part of
him satisfied. Everything worthwhile. In
euphoria. Now she's mine and I was manly and
she was womanly and oh Christ I hope I
didn't hurt her.
  "Are you all right, Angel?" he asked
huskily, his heart slowing but still hardly able
to talk. "I didn't hurt you?"
  "Oh no, my darling ... I love you so
much."
  "So, so do I, Angel, I can't tell you
enough." He kissed her and began to lift his
weight on to his elbows.
  "No, don't move, not yet, please, I like
you like th-- What is it, my darling?" she said
nervously, her arms tightening.
  "Nothing, nothing at all," he muttered,
dealing with the sudden pain from his loins that stabbed into the
base of his skull as he had moved.
Cautiously, he tried again, better this time. And
he stopped the groan this time.
  "Don't move, Malcolm," she said
tenderly, "stay still, rest, mon amour, I like
you like this, please ... please."
  Gratefully he obeyed, starting to murmur how
much he loved her, so comfortable, so possessed, so
peaceful, so utterly satisfied, to drift
into sleep, to sleep deeply. The ship's bell
sounded one bell: half-past midnight but he
did not stir, and she lay there, calmed and soothed
and gratified, her future launched, enjoying the
quiet of the cabin, timbers creaking sometimes,
waves lapping the hull, savoring the sensation of
fulfillment too.
  Without waking him, she slid from under him and went
to the bathroom and cleansed herself. She sighed and
begged forgiveness. A nick with the small knife.
Andr`e had said, "It's difficult, almost
impossible for a man to tell if the girl's a
virgin or not on their wedding night if he has
no reason to suspect, a little fear, a gasp at
the right time, a little telltale blood the clincher,
and in the morning all will be serene and as it should
be."
  What an awful cynic Andr`e is, she thought.
God protect me from him and forgive me my sins
--I'm glad I'm married, and soon off
to Hong Kong so I won't need to think
about him ever again, just my Malcolm ...
  She almost danced over to the bunk. Softly
into bed to hold his hand and close her eyes, seeing
glorious mind pictures of their future. I do
love him so.

  Suddenly she was awake, thinking she had felt
another earthquake. The cabin was dark, just the
barest flame of the gimballed lamp, swaying
slightly. Then she remembered dimming it before she
slept, realizing the sound that had awakened her was the
ship's bell and not the pealing of the cathedral during
the earthquake of her dreams, the earthquake only
the ship's movement, none of the dream bad. Then,
seeing him there beside her, she experienced a loving
glow, unlike anything before, knowing they were married and
that not a dream either.
  Four bells? 2:00 A.m. Or 6:00
A.m.? No, silly, it can't be, or there would
be light outside the portholes and Malcolm
said he had to go ashore before we slip anchor for
civilization to beard the Dragon in her lair--
no, to greet a mother-in-law I will charm and
beguile who will quickly love me and be the perfect
adoring grandmother.
  She watched him in the half-light. He was
sleeping on his side, his head cradled in his right
arm, his sleeping face without care lines, breathing
soft, his body warm with his good, clean manly
smell. This is my husband and I love him and
am only his and the other never happened. How lucky
I am!
  Her hand began to touch him. He stirred. His
hand reached for her too. Not quite awake he said,
"Hello, Angel."
  "Je t'aime."
  "Je t'aime aussi."
  His hand sought her. She responded. Caught
unawares he flinched and turned to her, held his
breath as a pain leapt to the back of his eyes, and
then, as it passed, exhaled.
  "Je t'aime, ch@eri," she said and
leaned down to kiss him, and between kisses whispered,
"No, don't move, stay there, stay still," and
added with a little laugh, her voice husky with need,
"Lie still, mon amour."
  In moments passion swamped him. Aroused and
throbbing, everything forgotten, now sensuality shared and
now moving slowly and slowly and then quicker and slow
again and deeper, her voice throaty,
urging him, him reacting, on and on, stronger and
stronger, all his glands and muscles and yearning
centering, centering until she was near and very near, and
going and near again, holding her, helping her,
thrusting until she sensed her body vanish, her
weight vanish, everything vanish and she collapsed
on him, her spasms and cries pulling him
further into her, his muscles stretched to the limit
by his final thrust. Then and then and then he too
cried out and was weightless, his body grinding of its
own accord, pumping of its own accord, until the
last, frenzied so welcomed spasm passed and
all movement ceased.
  Only panting breaths mixed, sweat mixed,
hearts mixed.
  In time he became conscious. Her sleeping
weight on his chest was as nothing. He lay there in
wonder, vibrantly aware, euphoric, one arm
holding her safe, knowing she was comely as ever a
wife could be. Her breath cooled his cheeks,
long and slow and deep. His head was cleansed and
future clear, without a shred of self-doubt.
Utterly sure that he had been right to marry her,
certain that now he could end the conflict with his mother and
that together they would end the Brocks, as he would end
Norbert, end opium sales and cannon
sales, and persuade Jamie to stay, and he would
rule Struan's as it should be ruled--as the
tai-pan would want it ruled. Until, with the
fullness of time, he would have done his duty and made
the Noble House first in Asia again, to pass it on
to the next tai-pan, the firstborn son they would name
Dirk, first of many sons and many daughters.
  How long he lay there he did not know,
supremely confident, joy-filled and in
ecstasy, his arms around her, loving her, breathing
her breath, more happy than he had ever been, could
ever be, his lips telling her he loved her, his
mind easing him into sleep in blissful warmth and
away from the memory of that awesome, marvelous,
agonizing, writhing, ultimate burst of
immortality that had seemed to him to tear him apart.

                 

    Wednesday, 10th December:
  In the grey dawn Jamie McFay hurried
up from the Drunk Town jetty and turned the
corner. Around it he saw Norbert and Gornt
in No Man's Land, waiting where they
should be waiting, noticing without interest the small
bag in Gornt's hand that would contain the duelling
pistols they had agreed on. Apart from the three of
them--and acres of flies--the foul, weed-covered
dump was desolate. He had passed no one
except drunks huddled and snoring in the corners
of shacks, sprawled on benches or in the dirt.
He had not seen them.
  "Sorry," Jamie said, out of breath. Like them
he wore a topcoat and hat against the morning
air, heavy and damp. "Sorry I'm late,
I ha--"
  "Where's the tai-pan of the Bloody House?"
Norbert asked rudely, shoving his chin out. "Is
he yellow or what?"
  "Go fuck yourself," Jamie snarled, his face
as grey as the dirty sky. "Malcolm's dead,
the tai-pan's dead." He saw them gaping at
him and he still could not believe it either. "I've just
come back from the ship. Went to fetch him before dawn
and, well they, he'd spent the night aboard
Prancing Cloud. He was ..." Words failed
him. His tears welled and again he relived the going
there and seeing Strongbow at the gangway, pale and
frightened, yelling out long before he had come
alongside that young Malcolm was dead, that he'd
sent their cutter for a doctor but for Christ's
sake he's dead.
  Then charging up the steps. Noticing
Angelique huddled in the corner of the
quarterdeck, wrapped in blankets, the First
Mate nearby but rushing past them, praying it was not
true or nightmare, then going below.
  The stateroom was bathed in light. Malcolm
lay in the bunk on his back. Eyes closed,
calm in death, no cares, sheets drawn up
to his chin, hitting Jamie that his friend was as he had
never seen him, exquisitely at peace.
  "It were ... it were Chen," Strongbow was saying
in a flood, distraught, "his servant Chen,
Jamie, he'd come to wake him ten fifteen
minutes ago, he's the one that found him,
Jamie, he found him--you can unbolt the door from
the outside like most sea cabins--and he did and
they were sleeping, he thought. She was but Malcolm
weren't and he shook him and saw and near died himself
and ran out and fetched me and by that time, she was
awake. She was awake and shrieking, poor thing,
desperate, shrieking enough to put your teeth on edge
so I took her out and told the first
Mate to look after her and came back but there were
no mistake, poor laddie, he's just as you see
him 'cepting I closed his eyes but look ...
look here ..."
  Trembling, Strongbow pulled the sheet away.
Malcolm was naked. The lower part of his body
rested in a pool of blood. The blood was dried
and caked now, the mattress soaked. "He
.... he must have hemorrhaged, only God knows
why but I suppose ..."
  "Christ Jesus," Jamie had said and
lurched for a chair and cursed and cursed and cursed
again, numb. Malcolm? "What the hell do I
do now?"' he asked himself helplessly.
  The voice of God ricocheted around the cabin
answering him: "You pack it in ice and send it
home!"
  Frightened, he leapt to his feet. Strongbow was
staring at him perplexed and, all at once,
Jamie realized it was the Captain who had
answered him, unaware that he himself had spoken the
question aloud. "Is that all you can bloody say for
Christ's sake?"' he shouted.
  "Sorry, Jamie, didn't mean ... I
didn't mean to be ..." Strongbow wiped his
forehead. "What do you want me to do?"'
  After another age, ears still pounding, head
scourged, he muttered, "I don't know."
  "Normally we, we would bury him at sea,
can't keep ... you could bury him ashore ...
what do you want me to do?"'
  Jamie's mind seemed to be in slow motion.
Then he noticed Ah Tok squatting near the
bunk, tiny, now an old crone, rocking on her
heels, mouth moving but no sound coming out. "Ah
Tok, you go up side, nothing here, heya?"'
  She paid no heed. Just rocked back and forth,
mouthing and did not answer. He tried again but it was
no use. To Strongbow he said, "You'd just
better wait. You wait for Babcott or
Hoag."
  Aloft again to kneel beside Angelique, in the still
dark, not yet dawn. But she would not answer him,
however tenderly he talked to her, saying how
sorry he was, how very sorry, trying to succor
her. Momentarily she looked up, without
recognition, great blue eyes in the whiteness of
her face, then huddled back in the blankets,
staring sightlessly at the deck.
  "I'm going ashore,
Angelique, ashore. You understand? It's ...
it's best to tell Sir William, you understand?"'
He saw her nod dully and touched her as a father
would. At the gangway he said to Strongbow,
"Put the flag at half mast, all hands
to stay aboard, your sailing orders are cancelled.
I'll be back as soon as I can. Best, best
not to touch anything till Babcott or Hoag
arrive."
  Going back to the shore he had been violently
sick and now he saw Norbert and Gornt in
front of him. Gornt was shocked, Norbert's
eyes glittered and, through his misery, he heard him
say, "Malcolm's dead? How dead for
Christ's sake?"
  "I don't know," he said, choked. "We,
we, we've sent for Babcott but it looks like
he hemorrhaged, I've got to tell Sir
William." He turned to leave but Norbert's
jeering laughter stopped him.
  "You mean the young bugger died fucking? Died on
the job? I come to kill the bugger but he's done
fucked his way through the Pearly Gates? Old
Man Brock will laugh fit to b--"
  Blind with rage McFay lashed out, his right fist
smashing into Norbert's face, sending him reeling,
and missed with a violent left uppercut,
overbalanced, and fell to his knees. Norbert
had twisted like a cat and leapt to his feet,
bellowing with fury, face bloody, nose ugly,
and kicked violently for Jamie's head. The
toe of his boot caught Jamie's collar and that
deflected and deadened the impact slightly or it
would have broken his neck instead of sending him
tumbling. Norbert wiped the blood off his face
as he rushed forward and again kicked savagely. But
this time Jamie was ready and he twisted aside before
Norbert could reach him and scrambled to his feet,
his fists bunched, his left arm momentarily
useless.
  For a second they squared off, pain
obliterated by hatred, Gornt trying to stop them
but at the same instant the two men charged, amok,
brushing him aside like a leaf. Fists, feet,
gouging, street fighting, knees into the groin,
nails clawing, tearing cloth or hair anything
to crush the other--the enmity of years exploding with
surpassing ferocity. They were the same height but
Jamie was thirty pounds lighter, Norbert
tougher and more vicious. His knife
appeared in his hand. Both Jamie and Gornt
called out as he lunged, missed, recovered,
slashed again and drew blood this time, Jamie
awkward and losing and tortured by the damaged
shoulder. With a victorious battle cry
Norbert thrust forward, to maim but not to kill, but
the same moment Jamie's fist crashed into the
bridge of his nose, smashing it this time, and
Norbert went down whimpering and stayed down, on
his hands and knees, sightless with pain, beaten.
  Jamie stood over him panting, Gornt
expecting him to finish the other man with a kick to the
groin and another to the head, then perhaps to use the
heel of his boot to mash his face forever. That's
what he would have done--not gentlemanly to pull a
knife or jeer at the death of another man, even
an enemy, he thought with satisfaction at
McFay's victory.
  But Malcolm's death had not pleased him at
all. It was the one option he had not planned for,
not today. Now his scheme would have to be revised, and
quickly. In God's name, how? Could this brawl be
used, he wondered, sifting possibilities
while waiting to see what Jamie would do next.
  Now that he had won, Jamie's rage
dissipated. His chest was heaving. Bile and blood
filled his mouth. He spat it out. For years he
had wanted to humble Norbert and now he had, and
had his measure once and for all time--and had taken
revenge for Malcolm who had been provoked
deliberately.
  "Norbert, you bastard," he croaked,
astonished how bad his voice sounded and how awful
he felt, "you say any, anything against my
tai-pan, anything by God, or laugh about him again
behind his back, I'll smash you to pieces."
  Roughly he stumbled past Gornt, hardly
seeing him, to go to the jetty. Ten or fifteen
yards away his foot caught in a rut and he
fell cursing, and remained there on his hands and
knees, oblivious of the others, spent.
  Norbert was coming around, spitting blood, his
nose ruined, a mass of hurt, sick with rage
that he had been beaten. And petrified. Old
Man Brock won't forgive you, his brain was
screaming, you'll lose your bonus and the stipend he
promised, you'll be the laughingstock of Asia,
beaten and pulped and marked forever by that son of a bitch
Jamie who's nowhere near your size, a Struan
bastard ...
  He felt himself helped to stand. Unsteadily he
forced his eyes open. Gasping for air and confused,
his face and head on fire, eyes puffed and
mostly closed, he saw McFay groping to his
feet a few paces away with his back towards
him, Gornt half in front of him, still carrying
the double-barrelled duelling pistol.
  Half mad with pain, a tangle of thoughts
rushed at him: Can't miss at this distance,
Gornt's the only witness, at the inquest
we'll say, "McFay went for the gun, Sir
William, we'd been fighting yes, a
struggle, yes, but he'd hit me first, didn't
he, Edward, tell the God's truth, then
terrible Your Honor, terrible it was, somehow the
gun went off, poor Jamie ..."
  Norbert grabbed the pistol and raised it.
  "Jamie!" Gornt called out in warning.
  McFay turned, startled, gaped at the
pointed gun as Norbert jeered and pulled the
trigger but Gornt was ready and with another warning
shout, deflected the shot upwards and now, with his
back towards McFay, covered the pistol with his
body, holding it in both hands with surprising
strength, simulating a momentary struggle with
Norbert for possession. And all the time he stared
into Norbert's eyes who saw, appalled, only
death. He twisted the muzzle into Norbert's
chest and squeezed the second trigger. Norbert
died instantly. Then, pretending to be aghast,
Gornt let the body fall. It had taken a
few seconds.
  "Christ Almighty," Jamie gasped.
Appalled he stumbled over and sank to his
knees beside the body.
  "My God, suh, I didn't know what to do,
oh my God, suh, Mr. Greyforth he was going
to shoot you in the back and all I did ... oh
my God, Mr. McFay ... you saw him
yourself, didn't you, I shouted a warning but ... he
was going to shoot you in the back ... isn't there
anything we can do? He was going to kill you ..."
Easy to convince McFay, who blearily staggered
away to fetch help.
  Once safely alone, Gornt exhaled.
Pleased with himself. Delighted he had, in that
instant foreseen what Norbert would do and had
gambled his life on it.
  "When you're gambling, timing and execution must
be perfect," was one of his stepfather's
litanies when teaching him the art of cards.
"Sometimes there comes a chance, young Eddie, a
gift from the Fates. They give you something
special, you take it and make a killing. You
win the big pot, you can't fail if they've really
offered it, their timing's perfect. But don't be
fooled by the Devil--he'll screw you to the
cross, his deal's like the other but different, you'll
recognize the difference once it comes your way
..."
  Gornt smiled crookedly. His stepfather
hadn't meant a killing literally though it had come
to pass that way for him. His gift from the Fates was
Norbert.
  Perfect timing, perfect killing, perfect
alibi.
  Norbert had to be sent onward for many
reasons. One was because Norbert might have been able
to deflect part of the Brock disaster, turning it
back against Struan's. Another that Old Man
Brock had ordered Norbert to kill Struan
any way he could, another--the most important
--that Norbert was common with no manners, no
finesse, no sense of honor, and not a
gentleman.
  Flies were already swarming around and on the
corpse. Gornt moved away and lit a
cheroot. His eyes searched No Man's Land,
looking through the mist. Still no alien eyes, no one
stirring. Dawn barely breaking the overcast.
While he waited he removed the blanks from the
other pistol, Malcolm's pistol, that Norbert
had insisted on. He smiled to himself. He would have
switched them, giving Norbert the duds, if
Norbert had decided to fight the duel, instead of
cancelling as agreed.
  What a bastard Norbert was, he thought.
Good riddance. But I'm sorry about Malcolm.
Never mind, now I'll go to Hong Kong and make
my deal with his mother--safer and better. Norbert was
right, she's the real tai-pan. I barter what I
would have given Malcolm, real means and evidence
to destroy Brock and Sons--to crush Morgan,
the devil incarnate.
  Vengeance is mine, saith the Lord. But not with
me. Not me, Edward Gornt, Morgan's
son. Ah, Father, if you only knew how
glorious revenge will be, how correct
patricide is! In payment for "I'll marry
the slut if ..."
  It's ironic, Morgan, you've spent your
life trying to ruin your only sister and her
family--your father the same with his only daughter--
and I'm your only son, and nemesis,
protecting her to ruin you.
  Safer dealing with Tess than Malcolm,
better. She'll deliver Rothwell's in
Shanghai, and underwrite the Victoria Bank
loans I'll need, and get me a seat on the
Board. No, not that, rightly she'd consider that a
threat, the seat will come later. Meanwhile, next
on the list, Cooper-Tillman.
  Meanwhile, what to do? Off to Hong Kong
soon as possible. Curious Norbert's gone,
and Malcolm. Strange.
  Dying on the job? I wonder. What a way
to go!
  By removing Malcolm the Fates dealt me
another prize. Angelique. She's free and
rich now, Noble House rich. Six months would
be perfect, time enough for mourning, and me to get
organized. By then Tess Struan will be glad
to have her out of Hong Kong, and out of her hair. And
married. Say she's pregnant? I'll worry
about that, if. Makes no difference either way,
I'll get the Noble House quicker than already
planned.
  His low laugh mixed with the hum of the flies.

  "Dr. Babcott's outside, Sir
William," Tyrer said.
  "Send him in for God's sake! George,
'morning, what the hell happened to the poor
fellow--terrible news! What about Angelique,
how is she, did you hear about Norbert?
Miserable bastard tried to shoot Jamie in the
back couple of hours ago!"
  "Yes, yes we heard," Babcott was
unshaven and clearly upset. "Hoag's taken
Angelique to the French Legation, we all
came ashore together--she wouldn't go back
to Struan's."
  "I can understand that, don't blame her, how is
she?"
  "In shock, of course. We've given her
sedatives. Dreadfully sorry for her--she's
had a rotten time here, the Tokaid@o, then that
bloody ronin thug and now this. Rotten luck, the
worst luck. She's hurt badly."
  "Oh. Will it, will it turn her
mind?"
  "Hope not. You never know. She's young and strong
but ... you never know. By all that's holy I hope
not." The two men were gravely concerned. "Such a
shame for both of them. Rotten business, feel so
damned useless."
  Sir William nodded, "Must confess I was
bloody angry about their marriage, but then, when
I heard this morning, well I would have given
anything for it not to have happened." His face hardened.
"Did you see Norbert's body?"
  "No, Hoag will do that once he's settled
Angelique. I thought I'd better come
straight here and report."
  "Quite right. Now, what happened to Malcolm?"
  In spite of his anguish, Babcott became
clinical. "Hemorrhage. An artery or vein
ruptured or burst. In the night, while he was
asleep, without any pain or contortions or he
would have awakened her, life seeped out of him.
I'll do an autopsy, have to for the death
certificate."
  "All right, if that's what you recommend."
Sir William turned his mind off that macabre
business, finding it distasteful, not liking either to be
close to the doctor, any doctor, their clothes
always bloodstained here and there, and always the faint
odor of chemicals and carbolic surrounding them,
however clean they were in themselves. "Poor young
Struan. Terrible. He just bled to death?"
  "Yes. For what it's worth, Malcolm ...
he was the most incredibly peaceful man I've
ever seen in death, as though it was welcomed."
  Sir William toyed with an inkwell on his
desk. "George, would he, would coming--I mean
finishing--would that, would that do it? I mean if he was
hugely excited?"
  "That's probably what happened. Not the
climax itself but the uncontrollable straining it
generates could easily tear weakened tissues or
cause a rupture. His genitals were in perfect
shape but his stomach cavity generally weak. I'd
repaired part of the large bowel and sutured a
couple of arteries, there were some nasty lesions and
he wasn't healing as I would have liked, his liver
was ..."
  "Yes, well, I don't need the details
now," Sir William said squeamishly, already
feeling slightly sick. "My God, young
Struan! Seems impossible--then
there's Norbert! If it wasn't for Gornt
we'd also have a murder on our hands. That fellow
deserves a medal. He said, by the way, Jamie
was provoked and Norbert deserved to get pasted.
Did you know Malcolm and Norbert were meeting in
Drunk Town to duel?"
  "Not till a moment ago. Phillip told
me. Madmen, both of them. Damn it, you warned
them!"
  "Yes I did. Damn fools, though
Gornt swore both had agreed to accept the
other's apology, but he also said Norbert told
him this morning he had changed his mind and was going
to kill Struan. Miserable bastard!"
Uneasily Sir William shifted things on his
desk, straightening papers, the small, silver
mounted portrait. "What do we do now?"
  "About Norbert?"
  "No, Malcolm, what about Malcolm first?"
  "I'll do the autopsy today, this evening. I've
taken the liberty of arranging to have the body taken
to Kanagawa--it'll be easier there. Hoag will
assist and you'll have a report in the morning.
We'll sign the death certificate, it'll all
be quite normal."
  "I meant with the body," Sir William said
testily.
  "You can bury him at your leisure. In this
weather there's no hurry, the body will keep."
  "Will it, is there time to send Prancing Cloud
to Hong Kong to find out what his, what Mrs.
Struan wants to do? I mean she might want
to bury him there an--"
  "My God, I wouldn't like to bring her that
news."
  "Nor would I." Sir William tugged at
his collar. As usual it was chilly in the office,
the coal fire tiny and miserable, with a strong
draft from ill-fitting windows. "Hoag's the
family doctor, he could go. But, George,
I mean, will he, will the body keep that long?
To send word to her, come back then take the body
back--if that's what she wants?"
  "You'd better make the decision, to bury him
here or to send him back at once. We'd keep
him on ice, surround the coffin with ice, on
deck under canvas, he'll keep very well."
  Sir William nodded, revolted.
"Phillip," he shouted through the door. "Ask
Jamie to come by at once! George,
I think the wisest course, provided he will, er,
he'll keep would be to send him back. What's
your advice?"
  "I agree."
  "Good, thank you, keep me advised about
Angelique and don't forget supper tonight. What
about our bridge game?"
  "Best postpone both till tomorrow."
  "All right, fine, that'll be fine. Thanks again
... damn it, I forgot. What about Norbert?"
  "A quick burial, soon forgotten and not
regretted."
  "I'll have to hold an inquest, Edward
Gornt's American, a foreign national--he's
preparing a signed statement. Just as well
Adamson's on leave or he'd want to be
involved. He's a lawyer isn't he, as well
as U.s. Charg`e d'Affaires?"
  "Doesn't matter either way. Hoag and I can
give medical evidence." Babcott got up and
added coldly, "But the "shooting in the back"?
Not a very good advertisement for Yokohama."
  "My whole point." Sir William's
face screwed up. "My whole point. Wouldn't
like that breezed about."
  "You mean to our hosts?"
  "Yes. They'll have to be informed, that's
required. Can't formally tell them exactly what
happened, in either case. Obviously Norbert's
an accidental death. But Struan?"
  "Tell them the truth," Babcott said,
enraged by the waste and furious with himself that his work had
not been good enough, and that, not as a doctor, he had
desperately wanted to take Angelique in his
arms to protect her from it all. "The truth is this
unnecessary, early death of that fine young man was
attributable directly to wounds sustained in his
unprovoked attack on the Tokaid@o!"
  Sir William added bitterly, "By murdering
bastards who still haven't been brought to justice.
You're right."
  He let Babcott out, waved Tyrer away,
then stood at the window, upset with his present
impotence. I've got to bring the Bakufu
to heel quickly or we're finished, and our vision of
opening up Japan is lost. They won't do it for
themselves so we have to help them. But they've got
to behave like civilized, law-abiding people ...
meanwhile the clock's ticking, I know in my
bones they'll fall on us one night,
put us to the torch and that will be that. Sure as God
made little apples!
  Oh yes, retribution would fall back on
them--with great loss of life. Meanwhile I will have
failed in my duty, we'll all be dead and that's
a very boring thought indeed. If only Ketterer
wasn't so pigheaded. How the hell do I turn
that obstinate bastard to my will?
  He sighed, knowing one answer: First you'd
better make a peace with him!
  Their stormy meeting late last night over the
Admiral's blatant disregard of Mrs.
Struan's request and his own advice, having had
no suspicion of the real reason until he had
wrung it out of Jamie McFay earlier, had
deteriorated into a shouting confrontation: "It was
ill advised to allow Marlowe to--"'
  "I thought it best! Now you listen to me--"'
  "Best? God damn it, I've just learned you
thought it best to stupidly interfere in political
and trade matters by trying to barter a nonenforceable
agreement with the pretender to the Struan throne and so
alienate the true head forever more!" he had said
furiously. "Didn't you?"'
  "And you, sirrah, you interfere in matters that
are the sole prerogative of Parliament--declaring
war--and the real reason you are so ill advised with
your language, sirrah, and so upset, is because
I will not begin a war we cannot win, cannot sustain with
our present forces, if at all, and in my
opinion any attack on the capital will rightly
be considered an act of war by the natives and not an
incident. Good night!"
  "You agreed to assis--"'
  "I agreed to rattle a few sabres,
fire a few practice rounds to impress the
natives but I haven't agreed to bombard
Yedo, nor for the last time will I until you show me
authority in writing, approved by the
Admiralty. Good n--"'
  "The Navy and the Army are subject
to civilian control and advice by God and I'm
the control here!"
  "Yes you are, by God, if I agree," the
Admiral bellowed, neck and face purple,
"but you're not in command of my ships and until I
get orders to the contrary, approved by the
Admiralty, I will run my fleet as I think
best. Good night!"
  Sir William sat back at his
desk. He sighed and picked up a pen and wrote
on his headed paper:

Dear Admiral Ketterer, Much of what you
said last night was correct. Please excuse
my ill-advised use of some words in the heat of the
moment. Perhaps you would be kind enough to stop by this afternoon.
You will have heard of young Struan's sad death that,
according to Dr. Babcott is "directly
attributable to wounds caused by the unprovoked
Tokaid@o attack." I will have to make
another, most serious complaint to the Bakufu about
the demise of this fine English gentleman and would
be very pleased to have your advice how this should be couched.
Most sincerely, my dear Sir, I remain
your obedient servant.

  "What I do for England," he muttered, then
shouted, "Phillip!" signed the paper and powdered
it to dry the ink.
  "Yessir?"
  "Make a copy, then send it to Ketterer
by messenger."
  "Jamie's just arrived, sir, and there's a
deputation asking that you make this "Angel
Day," a day of mourning."
  "Refused! Send Jamie in."
  Jamie was very bruised, his shoulder strapped up
now.
  "Jamie, you're feeling better? Good.
George Babcott gave me a report."
He told him what had been said about
Malcolm's body. "What do you think?"
  "We should send him home to Hong Kong,
sir."
  "Good, my thought too. You'll accompany the
... him?"
  "No sir. Mrs. Struan ... afraid she
doesn't approve of me anymore, and if I
went back it would only worsen a really rotten
situation for her, poor lady. Between us, I'm
dismissed at the end of this month."
  "Good God, why?" Sir William was
shocked.
  "Doesn't matter, not now. Angelique,
our Mrs. Struan, will of course go, and Dr.
Hoag--did you know she changed her mind and
decided to stay in her old apartments with us, and not
at the French Legation after all?"
  "No, oh well, I suppose
that's best. How is she?"
  "Hoag says, As well as can be expected,
whatever the hell that means. We'll send
Prancing Cloud soon as you and he give me
the word. When's that likely?"
  "George said he'd do the autopsy today and
sign the death certificate, I'll have that tomorrow.
The clipper could leave tomorrow, only problem would be
Angelique, when she's fit to travel." Sir
William looked at him keenly. "What about
her?"
  "Don't know, not really. I haven't seen her
since ... since being aboard. She didn't
speak to me, not once, not lucidly. Hoag's still
with her," Jamie tried to hold back his grief.
"We can only hope."
  "Rotten luck. Yes, no doubt about it.
Now, Norbert. We'll have to have an inquest of
course."
  "Good." Jamie touched his face, brushing
away a nagging fly that sought the dried blood.
"Gornt saved my life."
  "Yes. He'll be commended. Jamie, when you
leave Struan's what will you do? Go home?"
  "This's home, here or China," Jamie said
simply. "I'll, somehow I'll start my own
firm."
  "Good, I wouldn't like to lose you. Bless my
soul, I can't imagine the Noble House here without
you."
  "Nor can I."

  As the day wore on, the pall over
Yokohama thickened. Shock, disbelief,
anger, war fears, general fears--the Tokaid@o
remembered--mixed with many whispered snide
remarks, but careful who you said them to because the
Angel had violent champions and any raunchy
remark or laugh implied disrespect.
Malcolm was not so fortunate. He had enemies,
many were glad to sneer and happy another disaster had
fallen on Dirk Struan's progeny. And both
priests in their several ways were sternly
satisfied, seeing retribution from God.
  "Andr`e," Seratard said at the lunch table in
the Legation, Vervene a third man. "Did he
make a will?"
  "I don't know."
  "See if you can find out. Ask her, or
Jamie--he would probably know more."
  Andr`e Poncin nodded bleakly, worried
sick. Struan's death had disrupted his plan
to get more money from her quickly to pay Raiko.
"Yes, I'll try."
  "Very important we should continue to stress her
French citizenship to protect her when her
mother-in-law tries to break the marriage."
  Vervene said, "What makes you so sure that will
happen, that she'll be so antagonistic?"
  "Mon Dieu, it's obvious!" Andr`e
answered for Seratard, irritably. "Her
attitude will be that Angelique "murdered"
her son. We all know she hated her before, how
much more so now? She's bound to accuse her of God
knows what deviations because of her twisted
Anglo-Saxon sexual dogma, in private
if not in public. And don't forget she's a
fanatic Protestant." He turned
to Seratard, "Henri, perhaps I'd better see
Angelique." He had already intercepted her and
whispered that she should go back to Struan's and not
stay here at the Legation: "For God's sake,
Angelique, your place is with your husband's
people!" It was so obvious that she must strengthen her
position with Struan's--at any cost--that he had
almost shouted at her, but his sudden anger turned
to pity seeing the depth of her despair. "I'd
better go."
  "Yes, please do."
  Andr`e closed the door. "What the devil's
the matter with him?" Vervene said with a sniff.
  Seratard thought before answering, decided it was
time. "It's probably his illness--the English
disease."
  His deputy dropped his fork in shock.
"Syphilis?"
  "Andr`e told me a few weeks ago. You
should know, only you amongst the staff, as these
explosions may become more frequent. He's
too valuable to send home." Andr`e had whispered
he had made a brand-new, high-up intelligence
connection: "The man says Lord Yoshi will be
back in Yedo in two weeks. For a fairly
modest sum, he and his Bakufu connections
guarantee a private meeting aboard our
flagship."
  "How much?"'
  "That meeting would be worth whatever it costs."
  "I agree, but how much?"' Seratard asked.
  "The equivalent of four months of
my salary," Andr`e had said bitterly, "a
pittance. Speaking of that, Henri, I need an
advance, or the bonus you promised months
ago."
  "Nothing was agreed, dear Andr`e. In due
course you will have it, but sorry again, no advance.
Very well, that amount, after the meeting."
  "Half now and half after. He also told
me, for no money, Tair@o Anjo is sick
and may not last the year."
  "Has he proof?"'
  "Come on, Henri, you know that's not
possible!"
  "Get your contact to make this tair@o ape
see Babcott for an examination and ... and
I'll give you a fifty percent raise."
  "Double salary from today, double salary, and
I'll need to give my contact a hefty down
payment."
  "Fifty percent from the day of the examination and
thirty Mex in gold, five down and the rest after.
And that's all."
  Seratard had seen Andr`e's hope
escalate. Poor Andr`e, he's losing his
touch. Of course I understand a large part of the
money will stick to his fingers, but never mind, dealing
with spies is dirty business, and Andr`e is
particularly dirty though very clever. And
unfortunate.
  He reached over and took the last slice of the
one Brie cheese that had arrived, on ice, at
fantastic cost, with the last mail ship. "Be
patient with the poor fellow, Vervene, eh?" Every
day he was expecting to see signs of the disease but
nothing and every day Andr`e seemed a little younger, losing
his previous harassed expression. Only his
temper had deteriorated.
  Mon Dieu! A private Yoshi
meeting! And if Babcott could examine this
cretin Anjo, perhaps even cure him, at my
instigation--never mind that Babcott's English,
I'll barter this coup with Sir William for some
other advantage--we will have made a tremendous
step forward.
  He raised his glass. "Vervene, mon
brave, the pox on the English and Vive la
France!"

  Angelique was lying listlessly in the
four-poster bed, propped against
piled-up pillows, never more wan or more ethereal.
Hoag was in a chair by the bed, dozing, on and off.
The late afternoon sun broke through the clouds for a
moment to brighten a dull, windy day. In the roads
ships tugged at their moorings. Half an hour
ago--to her a minute or hour the same--the
signal gun had announced the imminent arrival
of the mail ship, waking her, not that she had really
been asleep, wafting instead from consciousness
to unconsciousness, no border between. Her eyes
drifted past Hoag. Beyond him she saw the door
to Malcolm's rooms--not his rooms, nor their
rooms, just rooms now for another man, another
tai-pan ...
  The tears returned in full flood.
  "Don't cry, Angelique," Hoag said
softly, tenderly, every fiber concentrated, watching
for telltale signs of looming disaster. "All's
well, life will go on and you're fine now, truly
fine."
  He was holding her hand. With a handkerchief she
brushed away the tears. "I would like some tea."
  "At once," Hoag said, his ugly face
filled with relief. This was the first she had spoken
since this morning, properly, coherently, and first
moments back were vital indicators. Almost
cheering he opened the door, for though her voice was
a thread, there was no hysteria in it or under it or
behind it, the light in her eyes was good, face no
longer puffy from tears, and her pulse he had
counted while holding her hand was firm and strong at
ninety-eight counts per minute, no longer
jumping around nauseatingly.
  "Ah Soh," he said in Cantonese, "bring
your Mistress fresh tea but not a sound, say
nothing and then leave." He sat near the bed again.
"Do you know where you are, my dear?"
  She just looked at him.
  "May I ask a few questions, if you're
tired, tell me and don't be afraid. Sorry
but it's important for you, not me."
  "I'm not afraid."
  "Do you know where you are?"
  "In my rooms."
  Her voice was flat, eyes blank. His
concern increased. "You know what happened?"
  "Malcolm's dead."
  "Do you know why he died?"
  "He died on our marriage night in our
marriage bed and I'm responsible."
  Warning bells sounded in the back of his mind.
"You're wrong, Angelique, Malcolm was
killed on the Tokaid@o, months ago," he
said, his voice calm and unshakable. "Sorry, but
that's the truth and he'd been living on borrowed
time ever since, not your fault, never your fault,
it was the will of God, but I can tell you this with all
my heart, we, Babcott and I, we have never
seen a man more peaceful, more at peace in death,
never, never, never."
  "I'm responsible."
  "The only part you're responsible for was the joy
in the last months of his life. He did love
you, didn't he?"
  "Yes but he died and--" She almost added, and
so did that other man, I don't even know his name
but he died too, he loved me too and he died
too and now Malcolm's dead an--
  "Stop it!"
  The snarled harshness jerked her from the brink.
Hoag began breathing again, but he knew this had
to be done and done quickly or she was lost, like others
he had seen. He had to rid her of the devil
lurking somewhere in her mind that was waiting to break out,
waiting to pounce, to turn her into a gibbering
lunatic, at least to harm her radically.
"Sorry. You've got to get this correct. You
are only re--" In panic he just caught himself
before using that word, changing it to, "answerable for his
joy. Repeat it for me. You are only ans--"
  "I am responsible."
  "Say it after me: I am only answerable for
his joy," he said carefully, more of an order,
noticing with alarm her abnormal pupils. She
was brinking again.
  "I am resp--"
  "Answerable, God dammit," he said with
pretended anger. "Say after me, I am only
answerable for his joy! Answerable for his joy!
Say it!"
  He saw the sweat break out on her forehead and
again she said the same and again he cut in, repeated
the correct word, "answerable, answerable for his
joy!" and again she said the other and again and during this
Ah Soh brought the tea but neither saw her and she
fled in terror as again and again Hoag ordered
Angelique and she refused until suddenly she
shrieked in French, "All right, I'm only
answerable for his joy but he's still dead dead dead
... my Malcolm's deadddddddd!"
  He wanted to hold her and tell her that all was
well and that she could sleep but he didn't,
judging it was too soon. His voice was hard but not
threatening and he said in his good French, "Thank you,
Angelique, but now we will speak English:
Yes, I'm terribly sorry too, we all
are that your lovely husband is dead, but it's not
your fault. Say it!"
  "Leave me alone. Get out!"
  "When you say it: not your fault."
  "Not ... not, leave me alone!"
  "When you say it. Not your fault!"
  She stared at him, loathing the tormentor he
was, then again shrieked at him: "Not my fault,
it not my fault, it's not my fault, not my
fault, now are you satisfied, Get out
gettout!"
  "When you tell me you understand your Malcolm is
dead but you are in no way responsible!"
  "Gettout!"
  "Say it! God dammit say it!"
  Suddenly her voice became like the howl of a
wild beast. "Yur Malcolm's dead yur
Malcolm's dead he's dead, he's dead he's
dead but yu're not not resp not responsible in no
way any God-cursed way not resp in any
way any way not responsible ... not respon
... not ..." As abruptly as she had begun her
voice changed to a whimper, "not responsible,
I'm not, I'm truly not oh my darling, I'm
so sorry, so sorry, I don't want you dead
oh Blessed Mother help me, he's dead and I
feel so terrible so terrible oh Malcolm why
did you die I loved you so much, so very much ...
oh Malcolm ..."
  This time he held her quiet, tightly,
absorbing the tremors and weeping and the racking
sobs. In time her voice trailed away, the
sobbing lessened, and she sank into fitful sleep.
Still he held her, gently but firmly, his clothes
stuck to him with sweat and did not move until the
sleep was deep. Then he eased away. His
back was sparking with pain and he stood carefully,
tortured, his muscles in spasm. When he had
managed to ease his shoulders and neck he sat
to regain his strength.
  That was a near one he thought, the pleasure that he
had won this time eliminating part of his pain, seeing
her as she was, young and beautiful and safe.
  His memory rushed him to Kanagawa
to that other girl, the Japanese sister of the man
he had operated on, as young and beautiful but
Japanese. What was her name? Uki something. I
saved her brother to wreak more havoc on this poor
child. But I'm glad she escaped. Did she?
Such a beautiful woman. Like my own darling
wife that was. How terrible and thoughtless of me, how
insane to take her from India to an early
London death.
  Dharma? Fate? Like this child and poor
Malcolm. Poor them, poor me. No, not
poor me, I've just saved a life. You may be
squat and ugly, old boy, he thought, taking her
pulse, but Christ Almighty you're a bloody
good doctor, and bloody good liar--no, not good,
just lucky. This time.

                 

    Thursday, 11th December:
  "'afn, Jamie," Phillip Tyrer said
sadly. "Sir William's compliments, here are
three copies of the death certificate, one for you,
one for Angelique, and one for Strongbow to go with the
body. The original he thought should go
by diplomatic pouch to the Governor's office for the
Chief Coroner Hong Kong who'll register it
then pass it on to Mrs. Struan. Ghastly,
isn't it, but there you are."
  "Yes." Jamie's desk was piled with incoming
mail, and documents concerning affairs to be
arranged. His eyes were red from tiredness.
  "How's Angelique?"
  "I haven't seen her yet but Hoag was here
first thing. He said to leave her alone until she
made the first move, that she was better than
expected. She slept for fifteen-odd hours.
He thought she should be well enough to travel tomorrow and
recommended the sooner the better. He'll go, of
course."
  "When's Prancing Cloud rescheduled for?"
  "Tomorrow. Evening tide. Strongbow will be here any
moment for sailing orders. You'll have mails to go with
her?"
  "Definitely. And a pouch. I'll tell
Sir William. Still cannot believe Malcolm's
dead. Dreadful. Oh by the way, the Norbert
inquest's been fixed for five. Would you like a
bite of supper afterwards?"
  "Thanks, but not tonight. Let's do it
tomorrow, all being well. We'll confirm after
breakfast." Jamie wondered if he should tell
Tyrer about the machinations of his samurai friend,
Nakama, and the meeting with the local moneylender--that
Nakama wanted private from Tyrer and Sir
William. Nakama's suggestion had intrigued
and he welcomed the opportunity of talking
direct to a local businessman, however minor.
  Yesterday's meeting had of course been
cancelled. He had considered putting it off until
next week, but had decided to meet the man tonight
--it might divert him for a moment or two from the
tragedy.
  It's none of Phillip's business--and
don't forget Phillip and Wee Willie have
been hiding all sorts of information when the
arrangement was for everything to be shared. "See you
later, Phillip. And thanks for these."
  "See you later, Jamie."
  The death certificates were signed by Babcott
and Hoag. The autopsy confirmed what had already
been said about death being caused by internal bleeding
of a damaged artery that had ceased to function
correctly, its weakened condition being directly
attributable to wounds sustained during the
unprovoked Tokaid@o incident.
  Jamie nodded to himself. The doctors had
skirted the matter of what had caused the
rupture. No reason to be more specific,
unless someone required a specific answer. Like
Tess Struan, he thought, a twinge in his
stomach. She's bound to ask and then what will Hoag
say? The same he told me this morning: "In
Malcolm's condition, Jamie, such a rupture
could be caused by any one of a dozen sudden motions,
like sleeping awkwardly, then turning suddenly because
of a bad dream, even the strain of a constipated
bowel."
  "Or particularly during intercourse?"'
  "Yes, that's only one of many
possibilities, why?"'
  "You know Tess Struan, for God's
sake."
  "I'm not going to damn Angelique if that's
what you're asking, it takes two to bed, we both
know he went out of his way to marry her and was madly
in love."
  "I'm not asking anything, Doc. Tess will
damn her whatever the certificate says."
  "I agree, Jamie, but she will
get no help from me. Nor from George. That a
violent climax caused the fracture, and their
subsequent euphoric sleep masked the fault
for both of them is logical, but not provable, and
even if it did, she is in no way to blame,
no way, dammit ..."
  Poor Angelique, she'll be blamed, like
I'll be blamed. Doesn't matter in my
case. "Yes? Come in? Oh hello,
Edward!"
  "Do you have a second?" Gornt asked.
  "Come in, of course." Since yesterday his
relationship with Gornt was different. He had
insisted being on first-name basis. My God, he
thought, how wrong I was about him. "Sit down.
Listen, I've said it a dozen times but thanks
again--you certainly saved my life."
  "Nothing, I was only doing my duty."
  "Thank God you did. What can I do for you?"
  "The rumor is that you'll be sending
Malcolm's remains back to Hong Kong for
burial, and I wondered if I could have passage
on your ship?"
  "Of course." Jamie hesitated.
"To report to Tyler Brock and Morgan?"
  Gornt smiled. "We can't avoid the truth,
Jamie. I'll take the result of the inquest with
me but it's up to me to tell them direct, man
to man."
  "Yes, you're right." Jamie's sadness
swooped down again. "I'm sorry Malcolm's
not alive to know what you did for me, sorry that he
won't be around to be friends with you, I know he
admired you greatly, sorry too that you work for
them."
  "After I see them I probably won't, I
was only loaned by Rothwell's, so it's of no
consequence. I'll go back to Shanghai after
Hong Kong."
  "You know, if I can help in any way, I
will."
  "You owe me nothing, I was just doing my duty but
a man always needs a real friend. Thanks, if I
get lost I'll ask. A cabin's all right then
on Prancing Cloud?"
  "She'll leave tomorrow evening."
  "I suppose Mrs. Struan will accompany
him? Difficult to think of him as dead, isn't
it?"
  "Yes. Dr. Hoag says she'll
be fit to travel then."
  "Rotten luck. Terrible. Thanks. See you
later."
  Jamie watched him leave, curiously
unsettled. Nothing he could articulate.
Guess I'm just so disoriented that anything and
everything seems odd. My God, even Hoag
acted peculiar, again nothing in particular.
  He forced himself to work for a while, then, needing some
documents from Malcolm's desk, got up and
went out along the corridor to the tai-pan's
office, automatically raised his hand to knock.
Grimly, he didn't, and opened the door to stop
in midstride. Angelique was sitting in
Malcolm's chair, behind Malcolm's desk.
Seated in front of her Heavenly Skye was
saying, "as far as I know and ..." He looked
around.
  "Hello, Jamie," Angelique said
quietly. Her dark dress set off the
alabaster texture of her skin, hair up off the
nape of her long neck, eyes clear, the
faintest natural color to her lips. "How are
you?"
  "Oh, er, fine," Jamie said, nonplussed
by her poise and new beauty--different than before,
now somehow distant, unattainable but even more
attractive. "Sorry, I didn't expect
... Dr. Hoag told me not to disturb you
until you called me. How are you?"
  "I asked him to do that. I'm ... I'm fine,
thank you. There were some things I wanted to arrange
this morning. I was sorry to hear about your, your ill
luck with Norbert Greyforth. Poor Jamie,
you're very bruised, are you all right?"
  "Yes, thank you," Jamie said, even more off
balance. Her voice was calm, too calm, and
there was a dignity about her that he could not for the moment
isolate. "Edward Gornt saved my life,
did you hear that?"
  "Yes, he told me about it a few minutes
ago--actually that's not right, he came here a few
moments ago to add his condolences and I saw him.
Mr. Skye told me about his bravery. And about
the duel."
  "Oh." Jamie wanted to curse Skye for his
interference.
  "Poor Malcolm," she said, "I'm
awfully glad I didn't know about that
foolishness. If I had I would somehow
have stopped it. But Edward, how lucky he was there,
but how awful, how awful some people are."
  "Yes, but more important how are you really?"
  "Not good and not bad. I'm nothing, and, well,
empty."
  "That's the right word, empty. Me too."
Jamie looked at Heavenly who smiled
noncommittally. The silence gathered.
Discomforted, he knew they both wanted him
to leave. "Anything I can do for you?"
  "Not at the moment, thank you, Jamie."
  Jamie nodded thoughtfully. "I need a few
papers."
  "Please help yourself." She sat back in the
chair that dwarfed her, composed and in control.
  Uncomfortably, he began to sift through the
ladened In and Out trays, decided to take them as
they were and put one on top of the other. "If there's
anything ... just call."
  "After Mr. Skye and I are through, perhaps a
few minutes if you're free."
  "Whenever, of course. Just ring that bell."
  Skye said, "Jamie, did you get the death
certificates yet, by chance?"
  "Yes I did."
  "Could I see a copy, please?"
  Jamie stared at him. "For what purpose?"
  "To check it."
  Angelique said, "Mal ... my husband had
retained the services of Mr. Skye--I
believe you knew that, Jamie?"
  "Yes I did." Jamie had noticed the
way she had changed Malcolm to my husband and
saw Heavenly nod approvingly and a danger
signal went through him. "So?"
  Skye said smoothly, "When I heard the
disastrous news I felt beholden to offer my
services to his widow ..." The word was
imperceptibly accented. "... which she has
kindly accepted. The tai-pan had asked me
to undertake certain research for him which I thought
Mrs. Struan might wish to continue."
  "Good." Jamie nodded politely and began
to leave.
  "The death certificate, Jamie?"
  "What's your pleasure, Angelique--
Mrs. Struan?"
  "Mr. Skye is my solicitor now,
Jamie. He understands these things, which I don't,
and he has agreed to act for me," she
said clearly in the same unemotional way. "I
would like you, please, to give him whatever help he
needs."
  "Of course. If you'll follow me,
Heavenly." Jamie walked out and went into his
office and stood behind his desk, pretending to look
for the papers that he had put into his drawer for
safety. "Would you shut the door, there's a
terrible draft." The small man obeyed.
"Listen," he said keeping his voice down but there
was no mistaking the undercurrent, "if you
bamboozle her, or play silly buggers or
overcharge her I'll kick the shit out of you."
  The little man came closer, his pebble glasses
cracked and fogged. "I've never done that to a
client in my life," he said, puffing up like a
cobra. "A few big bills, yes, but never more
than the market could stand. That woman needs help
for God's sake. I can give it to her, you
can't."
  "I can and will, by God."
  "I don't agree! Malcolm told me the
other Mrs. Struan, the woman in Hong Kong
fired you, true or false? And true or
false that you as well as Malcolm have been
getting angry, even threatening letters from her for
weeks, paranoiac against my client and her
engagement with all sorts of unfounded accusations?
True or false, for God's sake, that that
girl needs friends."
  "I agree she needs friends, I don't
object to her having a solicitor, I just want
to be sure you'll act correctly."
  "God dammit I've never buggered a client
in my life. Jamie, I may be a hungry
lawyer but I'm a good one, and we're on the
same side. She needs friends, Malcolm loved
her, you were Malcolm's friend for God's sake--
he told me about the letters you would have risked hanging
for."
  "Never mind that wh--"
  "I'm not arguing with you, Jamie, she's my
client and I swear I'll do best for her. The
death certificate, please."
  Seething, Jamie opened the drawer and gave
him a copy.
  "Thanks ... ah three, eh? One for your
files, one to go with the body and one for her, quite
correct though I'm surprised they bothered
to think of her, original by special
to Hong Kong." Heavenly scanned the paper.
"Christ Almighty!"
  "What's the matter?"
  "Hoag and Babcott," he said. "They may
be good doctors but as defense witnesses they're
a disaster! Shit, I should have been told before they
issued this--any fool could have given them better
wording!"
  "What the devil are you talking about?"
  "Murder, or at least a charge of murder."
  "You're mad!"
  "It wouldn't be the first for Tess Struan," the
little man hissed. "Remember the Bosun?
Everyone in Hong Kong knew it was an accident
but he was charged with murder, found guilty of
manslaughter and given ten years!"
  "The jury found him guilty not Tess by God
an--"
  "But she was the one who pressed for the charge!"
Skye slammed back at him, keeping his voice
down. "And she'll press charges here. If this was
read out in court in a criminal or civil
case, our opposing barrister would claim he died
fucking--please excuse my vulgarity--"and the
other half of the act sits in the dock there,
ladies and gentlemen of the jury, whose father is a
felon on the run, whose uncle is in a French
jail, who herself is a penniless adventuress, a
Jezebel who knowingly seduced this poor young
man, a minor, into marrying her and then, and then
ladies and gentlemen of the jury, with malice
aforethought seduced him into a early death--with
malice aforethought--knowing only too well his
wounds would do the job for her!" True or
bloody false?"
  Jamie sat down, paler than before. Hoag's
words had jumped into his mind. "What're you going
to do?"
  "First I'll try to get this wording changed,
don't think they will but I have to try. Do you have his
will? Malcolm's?"
  Jamie shook his head. "He never mentioned one
to me."
  "I told him it was important he should have one
drawn up when he first came to see me--that's
routine. You're sure?"
  "I know I don't have one, not in our safe."
Jamie frowned. Would Malcolm have made one?
If I was getting married, I would. Wait a
minute I was engaged to Maureen for
years and never had one. My God, I wonder
how she is, what she thought when she got my letter.
"He never mentioned a will to me. Did he
to Angelique?"
  "No, that was my first question. Perhaps he made one
without your knowledge. Did he have a safety box or a
special place for his private papers?"
  "No, not really, I suppose that would be in
Hong Kong, except there's a small safe in
his rooms."
  "Let's go and look." Skye started out of the
room.
  "Wait a minute, I don't think we can do
that."
  The words came back sharp, and formal: "Mrs.
Angelique Struan was his legal wife and is
his widow therefore his immediate heir and inheritor of all
his worldly goods unless his will states otherwise. If
there's no will then she inherits, after probate and
all legal fees and taxes are paid. Let's
look in his safe."
  "I don't think that we can presum--"
  "Now, quietly, between the three of us as friends,
or I'll get a formal court order through Sir
William today to sequester all, I repeat all
his papers, and all Struan papers in
Yokohama and Hong Kong, for a will search to which
my client is entitled." His look was
inflexible. "Sorry, old boy. Well?"
  "Let's go and ask Angelique." Unsure
of himself and knowing he could never allow an outsider
to go through Noble House papers and records,
Jamie followed Skye back to the tai-pan's
office. Dammit, why do I think of it as that,
he thought irritably. I suppose because it is the
tai-pan's office. Who's the new tai-pan?
Christ, what a mess!
  Angelique was sitting where they had left her.
Impassively, she listened to Skye. "There's
no need for you to accompany us, Mrs. Struan,
rest assured I act for you."
  "Thank you but I would like to be there."
  They followed her up the grand staircase, the
first time for Skye who tried not to be visibly
awed by the wonderful chandelier and valuable oils.
Jamie opened the door of the tai-pan suite.
A coal fire burned pleasantly. The
four-poster was made up and waiting. Desk
tidy, no papers on it. In a near corner of the
room Ah Tok squatted mumbling,
in despair, somehow tiny now, ugly and ancient.
She paid no attention to them. Angelique shuddered
then followed the two men and sat in Malcolm's
high chair facing them. Watching them intently.
  The little iron wall-safe was concealed behind an
oil painting, another Aristotle Quance. Skye
smiled thinly. The painting depicted a petty
young Chinese girl carrying a fair-haired,
fair-skinned child with a pigtail, a boy, against a
Hong Kong landscape. He had heard about the
painting but had never seen it. Quance was the dean of the
artist-chroniclers of Macao and early Hong
Kong, an Irishman who had lived there for many
years, and died a few years ago in Macao and
was buried there. He was also a voracious drunk,
gambler, libertine but old friend and devotee of
Dirk Struan. Rumor had it the girl was the
fabled May-may, Dirk's Chinese mistress,
the one who was killed with him in the typhoon of
'42, in his arms, and the child their firstborn.
  He glanced at Angelique who watched
Jamie impassively searching through a bunch of
keys and wondered if she knew about Malcolm's
Eurasian cousins and his uncle, Compradore
Gordon Chen--Dirk's son by another
mistress--who, according to Hong Kong gossip,
"knew more secrets and had more taels of gold
than an ox had hairs." The mantelpiece
clock chimed three.
  "Who else has keys, Jamie?" Skye
asked.
  "Just me, me and the ... the tai-pan."
  "Where are his?"
  "I don't know. I presume still with ... still
aboard."
  The safe door swung open. A few letters,
all in Tess Struan's writing, except one
in Malcolm's apparently unfinished, a small
chamois leather bag and a wallet. The wallet
contained a faded daguerreotype of his father and mother
peering self-consciously at the camera,
Malcolm's personal chop, a few chits--
IOU'S and a list of debts and debtors.
Heavenly leafed through them. "Would these others be
gambling debts he's owed, Jamie?"
  "I've no idea."
  "Two thousand four hundred and twenty guineas.
A tidy sum for a young man to lend or be owed. Do
you recognize any of the names, by chance?"
  "Just this one." Jamie looked at
him.
  "Madame Emma Richaud? Five hundred
guineas."
  Angelique said, "She's my aunt, she and
Uncle Michel, they brought me up, Mr.
Skye. Mama, I called my aunt that for she
was mother to me, my own died when I was young. They
needed help and Mal ... Malcolm kindly
sent them that. I asked him to."
  "Jamie, I'd like a copy of these, a list
please." The solicitor was talking again. "You
are required to hold them in safekeeping." He
reached for the half-dozen letters but Jamie was there before
him: "I'd say these were private."
  "Private to whom, Jamie?"
  "To him."
  "I will get a court order to see them and have them
copied if I consider them to be valid."
  "You certainly may do that," Jamie said through his
teeth, cursing himself for blurting out about the safe
until he could get Sir William's
advice.
  Angelique said, "May I see them,
Jamie, please? I suppose they are part of
my husband's effects. At the moment they seem
so few."
  Her voice was so gentle, so sad, no shred of
begging, that he sighed and said to himself, Laddie,
you're in so deep now it doesn't matter. Sir
William will have to decide legalities. Then,
suddenly, he was back at yesterday eventide,
on the jetty, the three of them so lighthearted,
laughing, confident, with any future Hong Kong
stormclouds seemingly so far away, seeing the
two of them off in the cutter for their wedding night,
Malcolm saying, "Thanks, my bonny friend,
guard our tail, it's going to need guarding.
Promise?"'
  He had promised, sworn he would do that, and
guard her equally, wishing them long and happy
lives, and waved, last on the shore. How right
Malcolm was. Poor Malcolm, did he have
a premonition? "Here," he said kindly. Without
looking at the letters she put them in her lap and again
folded her hands, again motionless. A draft waved
a vagrant strand of hair near her temple.
Otherwise she was quite like a statue.
  The chink of coins attracted Jamie's
attention. Skye had opened the little bag. It
contained Bank of England golden
guineas, and notes. He counted them aloud.
Angelique's eyes did not move from the maw
of the safe.
  "Two hundred and sixty-three guineas."
Skye put them back in the leather sack. "These
should go to Mrs. Struan at once--she will of
course give you a receipt."
  Jamie said, "Perhaps it's best that we, you and
I, Heavenly, we go and see Sir William.
I've never been involved in this kind of matter
before and I'm out of my depth--Angelique, you do
understand, don't you?"
  "I'm out of my depth too, Jamie,
adrift too. I know Malcolm was your friend and you
were his, as you are mine too. He told me many
times. Please do whatever you think best."
  Skye said, "We'll see him now, Jamie,
sooner the better, he can decide on the ownership
of these. Meanwhile ..." He walked over
to give her the little bag but she said, "Take it with
you, take everything, and these too," she handed him the
letters. "Just leave me the photograph. Thank
you, Mr. Skye. And thanks, dear Jamie, and
I'll see you when you return."
  They waited for her to get up but she made no
move. "You're not going to stay here are you?
Surely not?" Jamie said, perturbed, it
seemed so macabre.
  "I think I will. I spent so much time here, in
this room, that it's, it's sympathetic to me. The
door to my suite is open if I ... if I
need to rest. But please, would you take Ah Tok
away, poor thing, and tell her not to come back.
Poor woman, she needs help. Ask Dr.
Hoag to see her."
  "Do you want the door closed?"
  "Door? Oh, it doesn't matter, yes,
if you wish."
  They did as she asked and made sure Ah
Tok was handed over to Chen who himself was still distraught
and in tears and went out into High Street, both of
them relieved to be in the open again but lost in their
own thoughts. Skye was planning and sifting the
quicksands that lay ahead, Jamie unable to plan
yet, his planning brain devoured by the tragedy and,
he did not know why, concern for the Noble House.
  What is it about her? he was asking himself,
unaware of the promenade, or gusting wind, surf
grinding up the pebbled beach, or the smell of
rotting seaweed. Sadness suits her.
Can it be that ...
  She's a woman now! That is what's
different, she has a depth and poise that wasn't
there before. She's woman, no longer girl. Is
it because of the catastrophe, or because she's no longer
virgin--the mystic change they say happens, or
is supposed to happen at the transmutation? Or
both, with perhaps the finger of God helping her
to adjust?
  "Christ," he said, despite himself, thinking
aloud, "what happens if she has a child?"
  "For her sake, I pray she does," the little
man said.

  When they left, Angelique closed her
eyes and breathed deeply. Soon she was soothed
and got up and bolted the door, then opened hers.
Her bed was made up, fresh flowers in a vase
on her dressing table. She went back
into Malcolm's suite, bolting her door, and
sat back in his chair.
  Only then did she look at the photograph
--the first of his parents she had seen. On the back
was October 17th, '61. Last year.
Culum Struan appeared much older than his
years, forty-two, Tess neither old nor young,
pale eyes gazing directly at Angelique,
the thin line of her lips dominant.
  Tess turned thirty-seven this year. What will
I look like when I'm her age--in nineteen
years, more than twice my age today? Will I have the
same hard cast to my features that shout an
unloving marriage and crushing family burdens--
hating her father and brothers, them hating her, both
sides trying to ruin the other--that began in her
case so romantically, eloping and married at
sea, like we did but oh my God, with what a
difference.
  Her eyes looked out of the window and to the bay and the
ships there, a merchant steamer leaving port--
captain and officers on the bridge, the mail
ship surrounded by tenders, the Struan cutter there,
and Prancing Cloud. Elegant, straining to up
anchor and up canvas to sail the wild winds.
That's what Malcolm always said about their
clippers, she thought, that clippers sail the wild
winds.
  She closed her eyes and rubbed them and looked
again. No mistake. All day her eyes had an
unexpected, startling clarity of vision.
She had noticed it the moment she had awoken this
morning, every detail of the room in focus,
curtains, dead flowers in a vase, flies
circling, four of them. Within seconds there had
been a knock and Ah Soh's voice,
"Missee? Med'sin man wan you see-ah,
heya?" as though, her hearing also more acute, the
sound of Ah Soh's footsteps had brought her
smoothly out of sleep.
  What was even stranger was the clarity of her
mind, all the weight seemed to be gone, not the
sadness but how clearly it considered problem after
problem without consternation, never mixing them, suggesting
answers, and never the usual heart-hurting fear,
not even a little. Concern yes, that was only sensible,
but no more nauseating panic and indecision.
  Now she could remember that day and that night in
all its details without a crushing, inhuman,
insensate blankness. Have I been numbed?
Forever? Is what Dr. Hoag said this morning
correct: "Don't worry, you're cured of
any problem. So long as you can cry from time to time,
and not be afraid to go back in time if that's what
your mind wishes to do, then your life will be fine,
better every day. You have youth and health, your life
is before you ..."
  Mon Dieu, such platitudes they talk,
doctors. After Hoag, Babcott. More of the
same. He had been gentle and tall and tender,
a tenderness that could turn into heat if she would allow
it. No more heat, she thought, not until I am
free. And safe. Safe and free.
  Her body was rested. No blinding headache, not
even a little one, no screams inside. Knowing at
once where she was, who she was, and why she was
here, and why alone, and what had happened.
Experiencing it again, watching herself in the daymare,
conscious of it all but not involved, not truly
involved: watching herself being wakened by Chen's
wailing shriek, torn out of sleep, seeing herself
in panic trying to shake Malcolm awake too
then glimpsing blood on her lower limbs,
horrified for a moment she had cut herself too
deeply and then realizing that it was him, his blood,
and that he was dead, dead dead.
  Leaping out of bed naked, not aware of it,
terrified and shrieking, disbelieving what her eyes
and ears told her, praying it was a dream, others
rushing into the cabin, Ah Soh, Ah Tok,
someone covering her, voices and shouting and
screams and questions and more questions until the cabin
smashed her into blackness and terror. Now on the
bridge, freezing and burning and questions and no
answers, her mouth locked, head afire, stench of
blood, taste of blood, blood on her loins
and on her hands and in her hair, stomach
rebelling.
  Ah Soh helping her into a bath, the water
cool, never enough hot to clean away his death, more
sickness and then the blinding poison filling her,
drowning her until she saw herself shrieking at
Hoag, a picture of ugliness, oh so ugly.
  She shivered. Must I look like when I'm
old? How old is old? Not very for some. What
exactly she had said to Hoag, even now she could
not recall, only that the poison had gushed away
andwiththe torrent, good sleep came to pass.
  I've much to thank Hoag for, and Babcott
to loathe for--his sleeping draft began my sink
into despair. I'm no longer afraid, no
longer in despair, I don't understand why but it's
true--thanks to Malcolm and Hoag, to that
smelly little lawyer with his foul breath, and
to Andr`e. Andr`e is still wise, still my confident and
will remain so, so long as I pay. Yes he's a
blackmailer. That doesn't matter. To help
himself he has to protect me and then, well, there
is a God in Heaven and the mills of God grind
slowly but they grind exceeding small.
  I can deal with my life now, I think, if
I'm careful.
  Madonna, we agreed so long ago that I had
to help myself and could not be dependent on a man or
men, like the rest of my poor sisterhood. I know
I'm a sinner. Malcolm was truly the only
man I've ever met I really wanted, really
loved and really wanted to marry, loved as much as a
silly teenager could love. Is first love true
love? Or is love an adult emotion? I'm
adult now. Was my love for Malcolm adult?
I think so, hope so.
  But my darling is dead. I accept that. And
now?
  Tess? Hong Kong? Andr`e? Gornt?
Home? Tess?
  One at a time.
  First my darling must be put to rest. Properly.
  She saw the safe, its door shut but not
locked. She got up and opened it fully, reaching
into the back, touching a small, concealed
indentation. Part of the left wall swung open. In
the cavity were some papers, another personal chop,
another bag of coins and notes. A bottle of
his medicine. A small box.
  A week ago Malcolm had shown her the
secret hollow, smiling at her. "There's
nothing much to hide yet, all the important
stuff's in Hong Kong with Mother, papers about being
tai-pan, a copy of father's will, mother's will and so
on, the tai-pan's chop. This is for," he
shrugged, his eyes alight, "for odds and ends and
secret presents I might give you, if you're
very good and love me to distraction ..."
  She opened the box. A gold ring, set with
rubies. Not very valuable, but valuable enough. The
papers were business papers she did not understand,
lists of figures.
  And no will.
  Damn, she thought without anger. It would have made
the future more simple. Andr`e had pointed that out.
  He had been summoned this morning by Vargas
at her request from the list of people who had called and
left cards. "Monsieur Vargas, first my
tailor, I must have mourning clothes urgently,
after him, Monsieur Andr`e, then Mr. Skye
--no need to disturb Mr. McFay until I
send for him. To anyone else I'm resting, and
Monsieur," she added carefully, "please
treat all this with the discretion my husband told me
you possess. I'll see everyone in the
tai-pan's office."
  She had seen a flicker in Vargas's eyes
at "tai-pan" but he had said nothing so no
need to be firm. The office had been chosen with
care and when the old dressmaker arrived with
Vargas she said, "Please ask how long it would
take to make a mourning dress, black, like
this." The one she wore was long-sleeved,
high-necked, dark blue.
  "He says three days. Mourning, senhora?
The color for mourning in China is white."
  "I want it in black. Silk. And tomorrow."
  "Three days."
  "If he takes my other dress, the pale
blue one he made for me and dyes it black,
how long?"'
  "He says two days."
  "Tell him the widow of the tai-pan of the Noble
House requires such a black dress tomorrow.
Tomorrow morning."
  The old Chinese had sighed and bowed and went
away. Then Vargas announced Andr`e Poncin.
"Hello Andr`e."
  "Hello. I've never seen you more
beautiful."
  It was a statement, not a compliment. "I need
advice, quickly, privately. We must be very
quick, very wise. My marriage is legal,
yes?"'
  "We think so, yes, according to British naval
law, we're not sure about French law. Both
are grey areas."
  "I don't understand?"'
  "Subject to argument. If there was an argument
between French and British lawyers, British law
would prevail. The reality of him being a minor,
both of you in fact though in this he's the
important one, sorry, and his disobedience of the
written dictates of his legal guardian means
that the marriage ceremony will probably be
challenged."
  "Where? Here? By whom?"'
  "By Tess Struan. Who else?"' he said
mockingly.
  "Malcolm's death is meaningless to you, isn't
it?"'
  "On the contrary, it has complicated my
life immeasurably, Madame," he added, the
first time using the title. "It is a serious
complication for both of us."
  She had chosen to sit behind Malcolm's desk,
in Malcolm's office, for her future was at
stake and she had to have a hundred percent of this
man's cunning, and then more. In her suite, she
would be less confident, though ordinarily at her
best in her boudoir. Is that why men have offices,
and women are limited to the chaise and the femininity
of a semi-bedroom? "How can this be made
uncomplicated, Andr`e?"'
  "The first complication you've already
uncomplicated."
  When she had fled in misery to the Legation he
had intercepted her almost dragged her into his
office, cursing her once the door was closed,
shaking her angrily, saying, You stupid bitch,
are you mad? Get back to his house and stay there
and don't move, you can't hide here or you'll
ruin yourself! Go back there, you fool, we'll
talk later and for God's sake don't sign
anything, don't agree to anything, go
on, get out!
  "You were quite right, Andr`e," she said, not
resenting his venom, or violence, understanding
clearly. "Thank you for telling it to me so it
got through to me, got through my anguish. That was the
first. Next?"'
  The lines in his forehead deepened. This was a new
Angelique, an unknown quantity,
unexpected. He had seen such a change twice
before in men, never a woman. Both had been enemy
spies released after extreme torture. The
doctors had no explanation other than to say, the
men no longer feared, or feared more torture, or
feared dying. They had been dragged to the brink and
had survived, and were now convinced, beyond doubt, they
would survive again whatever was done to them, or they
would die and that no longer mattered. The doctors
had said that death itself wouldn't matter until the day,
weeks or months or years ahead when the terror
raised its vile head again as it was bound to do.
  Poor Angelique sitting there so confident,
so grand. There'll come a day when it will all spill
out, will tear you asunder. Will you conquer it or end up
in the madhouse?
  For himself he would have bet that so many calamities
would prove too much for such a young girl: the
flight of her father, theft of her dowry, rape and
pregnancy, the shooting of the rapist, and now this
new and ghastly death that he and all the Settlement
knew in its most graphic details. He and
Seratard had expected her mind to be turned,
at least for months, still expected it to happen,
neither believing Hoag whom they had cross-questioned
closely.
  If Hoag can work this miracle, he thought
angrily, why can't doctors cure the
God-cursed English disease? It's not fair.
"Life isn't fair, is it?"'
  "No," she said. "Not fair at all."
  "Did he leave a will, naming you his heir?"'
  "I don't know. Malcolm never mentioned
one."
  "Angelique, in future refer to him as your
husband, and yourself his widow."
  "Why?"'
  "To establish, to help establish your claim
to his estate." He saw her nod to herself, awed
at her control. Is it an Act of God that she
can appear so tranquil?
  "If there's no will, does that make
a difference?"'
  "We're trying to find out. It would be best if
there was one that named you. That would be best. Next, you
must go back with ... with his remains to Hong Kong.
Be prepared for his mother to be hostile--in public
try to be her friend. You should be at the funeral,
dressed correctly of course." Then he
added, "Possibly Henri could give you a letter
to our Ambassador, you've already met him?"'
  "Yes. Monsieur de Geroire. Henri
"could"? What sort of letter could he write for
me?"'
  "If Henri could be persuaded, with his strong
recommendation you could be put under de Geroire's
protection as ward of the State. It's my
conviction you're legally the widow of the late
tai-pan, Malcolm Struan. If Henri
supported us strongly, this could possibly become
State policy."
  "Then I need serious protection?"'
  "I am sure of it. Henri isn't."
  She sighed. This was what she had concluded too.
But State policy? This was a new idea, a
possibility she had not thought of. State policy
would mean the protection of France. Anything was
worth that--no, not anything. "What could I
possibly do to persuade Henri?"'
  "I could do that for you," he said. "I'd
try."
  "Then please start at once. This evening
tell me what I can do in return. Would before
dinner be suitable, or tomorrow morning--just as you
wish."
  There had been no need to say more. Tomorrow would be
better, Andr`e had told her, and had left, and
before her next guest, Skye had arrived she lay
back in the chair and smiled at the ceiling,
wondering about the price.
  Ward of the French State? She had liked the
sound of that for she knew she would need all the help
she could have to combat the ogre of Hong Kong ...
  And now, curled up in Malcolm's other
chair in the tai-pan's suite upstairs, the
door bolted on the inside, she liked the idea
even more and, again, wondered about the price. It will be
expensive. The secret gold coins will be enough
to begin with, then the ruby ring and now I have a chop,
Malcolm's chop.
  She replaced everything and shut the secret
compartment.
  Content with the headway made on the first day of her
new life, she closed her eyes and slept
dreamlessly until a knock on the door brought
her back. It was almost four-thirty. "Who is
it, please?"
  "Jamie, Angelique."
  A current of expectation went through her. Be
calm, she cautioned herself as she unbolted the
door, the ice you traverse is exceedingly thin
and the waters below lethal. "Hello, Jamie,
dear, please come in." Again she sat in her
husband's chair, motioning him to the chair she had
always used. The change pleased her. "You look so
harassed, so sad."
  "I still can't get used to the idea and, well,
all the changes, Angelique."
  "No. It's very hard."
  "You've changed too. May I, may I
say how marvelous you are being, so strong and,
well, you know."
  "That's the problem, dear Jamie, I don't
know. I only know what has happened and can
accept it, have accepted it. My tears ... I
think I must have cried all the tears of my life
away. So, for the moment no tears. You saw Sir
William?"
  "Yes. Skye said he would come back around
six, if that's convenient." He saw her nod
absently.
  "You don't like him, Jamie, do you?"
  "Don't like any lawyers, they always mean
trouble though he's not a bad man. I think
he'll be all right for you. If you get worried,
tell me at once. Mal ... Malcolm
liked him and you should have someone to represent you."
  "I find it hard to say his name too, Jamie,
"Husband" is equally hard. Harder. Don't
be embarrassed."
  Jamie nodded bleakly and took out the letters.
"Sir William said these were part of his estate, like
the money. He could not rule on the legalities
--he would write posthaste to the Solicitor
General in Hong Kong--but he saw no reason
why you shouldn't have these if you promise not to destroy
them. As to the sovereigns you should keep them--I
told him I didn't think you had any money of
your own at the moment--but he asks, please,
to give him a receipt for them."
  "Whatever he wants. Did he read them?"
  "No, no one did."
Hesitantly he put them on the
mantelpiece. "There are a couple of other
things, we've made some arrangements--would you like
me to tell you now or ... I can easily come
back later."
  "No, I'm fine. What arrangements,
Jamie?"
  He took a deep breath, hating to have to say
all this but it was his duty. "In consultation with
Sir William, Babcott and Hoag, we've
arranged to send the body back to Hong Kong tomorrow
for burial, we all agreed, we jointly
agreed that would be best. Everything possible will be
done and is being done to make this easy for you and the
trip as tolerable as possible. Dr. Hoag will go
with you to make sure you're in good hands."
Jamie's smile was empty and his face a
mirror of unhappiness. "Can't tell you how
sorry this all makes me. Ah Soh can pack
for you in good time, Chen will help if necessary and will
pack things to go with the ship, sailing on the evening
tide, meanwhile if you need anything, say the
word."
  He saw her look down at her hands, her
fingers twisting Malcolm's signet ring on her
marriage finger. Poor Angelique, she
doesn't even have a proper wedding ring.
  "Well, that's all for the moment--would you like
company at dinner tonight?"
  "Thank you, but no, I'll eat here, or in the
dining room or my rooms but please sit down.
Sorry, that's not all for the moment. My husband
is not going to be taken back to Hong Kong for
burial but will be buried here. Neither my husband
nor I will ever go aboard Prancing Cloud
again."
  She saw his look but that did not divert her from
what she had decided this morning: the confrontation
must happen at the very first mention of their
arrangements. "Would you like me to tell you the
funeral arrangements now, or would you prefer them
later?"
  "But everything's done," he said, "arrangements
are already made. It's best, we all felt it
would be best and we ... we know it would be the best for
you and everyone. Mrs. Struan would certainly
approve and would of course want him buried at
home in Hong Ko--"
  "Mrs. Struan? I'm Mrs. Struan. You
refer to the other Mrs. Struan,
Tess Struan, the other Mrs. Struan?" She
spoke without emotion. "She doesn't have
precedence in this matter. I'm his widow and take
precedence over his mother."
  "My God, Angelique, just because Skye
says you are--"
  "This has nothing to do with Mr. Skye,
Jamie, he didn't suggest this, nor have I
consulted him. Yet. But I do know my rights, and
husband's wishes, and they will be carried out."
  "But ... but ..." Jamie was in such shock he
could not get the words out, then they came with a rush,
"but you can't override what Sir William and
... and what Doc Hoag and Babcott and I
think is best for you and him, what we're sure is
best for you and everyone. You're overwrought.
Angelique. It's best, Angelique, it
really is."
  "Overwrought? Me? How silly you are,
Jamie." She allowed a small glacial
smile. "I'm not overwrought at all. I'm
merely going to put my husband's wishes
into effect."
  "But everything's arranged, Prancing
Cloud's ready to leave and the ... everything's
arranged."
  "I'm glad the clipper's ready. By all
means send her at once, his mother should hear the
terrible news as soon as possible--you should do that
yourself, Jamie, go with Prancing Cloud, you're
the senior here, you should. I beg you don't wait
until tomorrow, go tonight, you can break the terrible news
to her, it will lessen her hurt. You must."
  "Of course I'll do that if it's necessary," he
said, hating the idea. "But Angelique, this is
ridiculous, you can't be serious, you must see it's
best! Good God, Angelique, you must see this
is--"
  "Best for you and others perhaps but not for my husband
and therefore not for me. He has a right to be buried
as h--"
  "You must allow us to do what's best, his body
will--"
  "My husband's body will not, will not go back
aboard that ship, nor will I," she said quietly.
"Tell me, old friend, if I was to go with her as you
suggest, where would I stay? In the state room?"
  He stared at her, that problem not having occurred
to him. "No, of course not," he said quickly, "of
course you have the pick of the cabins. I
guarantee everything will--"
  "I guarantee every little thing will be done as my
husband wished."
  Jamie wiped his forehead, his mind working like never
before, slightly sickened and out of balance whereas it
was obvious she was nothing if not in control. A
sudden idea. "Perhaps you're right. Prancing
Cloud's wrong, perhaps. We'll charter another
ship--wait, the mail ship's due to leave day
after tomorrow, we'll get space aboard her for you,
Hoag and ... and him, and I'll persuade her
captain to sail early. Tomorrow ... That'll solve
everything, right?"
  "No." She sighed wearily. "Sorry,
Jamie, no." Now there was the barest edge to her
voice that cut through plainly. "Please understand
me, no. No! He will be buried here as he would
wish. The day after tomorrow."
  "You can't. Mrs. Struan must ... I mean
Tess Struan must be given time. We'll send
Prancing Cloud for her, she would want to be
at the funeral, must be."
  "You can do what you like but my husband will be buried
the day after tomorrow in the way he would want--I
don't think there would be time to do what you suggest.
I'm not going to argue with you. Sorry, old friend,
it's you who are overwrought and I can well understand
it. Please ask Sir William, and Mr.
Skye to come by together now, as soon as possible and
I will settle the matter formally."
  "For God's sake, the family crypt in
Happy Valley is where his grandfather, father and
brothers and sisters are buried."
  "Jamie, I tire of repeating: Please
ask Sir William and Mr. Skye to come here
as soon as possible. Together."
  He did not know what to do so he shrugged
helplessly and went out.
  For a few minutes she sat still and breathed
deeply. That wasn't so bad, she thought, then
stretched and got up and went into her own room.
There she selected a clean dress,
conservative, dark grey, put it on the bed. The
wind rattled the windows but did not chill her.
Her mirror beckoned her. She studied herself.
Critically. No smile. What she saw
pleased her. And the new person she had become also
pleased her. It was like fitting into a new dress--
no, a new skin. "I hope it lasts," she said
to her reflection. "We must work to make
it last. This me is better than the other one."
  Then she took up the first of the letters, Tess
Struan's letters. She wanted to leave his to last.

        END OF VOLUME IX





















 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



    Volume It of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 2027-2264




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

             BOOK FOUR

                 

    Thursday, 11th December: (continued)
  Sir William was stony-faced. So was
Jamie. Doctors Hoag and Babcott were
frowning. Heavenly Skye had a bemused glint in
his eyes. All were sitting on chairs in front
of Malcolm's desk. She faced them from his
tall chair, tiny but secure in it. Darker
dress than before, three-quarter sleeves,
square neckline, her back straight, coiffure
perfect. Without makeup and somehow regal. "The
day after tomorrow?" Sir William asked.
  "Yes, please," she said. "My husband should
not be laid out for long for people to pay their last
respects, if they wish to. Isn't three
days normal, Doctor?"
  "Normally, yes, Angelique," Hoag
said. "But we've already made arrangements for the
preservation of the body during the voyage home.
Everything will be fine, you've no need to worry."
He added gently, "He should be buried there, he
really should. We all agree."
  "You've embalmed him? Already?"
  The men shifted uneasily. Hoag said,
"No, that's not usual. You, er, you use ice
to ensure the preserv--"
  "Would you relish being packed in ice and sent
to Hong Kong like a carcass of mutton from
Australia?"
  The tension in the room spiraled, the men more
embarrassed than before. Her voice remained
quiet, firm and friendly, which tended to further
infuriate them. Except for Skye for whom she
was taking on a very new dimension.
  Sir William said, "That's not the point,
Madame. We feel for his sake and family's
sake that burial at home is wise."
  "He admired his grandfather, the tai-pan,
didn't he?"
  "Indeed he did," Sir William said.
Abruptly, he relaxed, no longer concerned, for
now he had the answer to the conundrum, whatever
she said. "Everyone knows that. Why?"
  "Many times, in various words, Malcolm said
he wanted to live like him, be remembered like him and
be buried like him. And that's the way it will
be."
  "Very correct, and wise." Sir William
added crisply, "His grandfather's buried in the
family crypt in the cemetery in Happy
Valley." He added kindly, "Angelique,
I agree it should be the same for him. Now I
unders--"
  "But Dirk Struan wasn't buried in Hong
Kong," she said, startling them. "Oh I know his
name's carved into the stone but he was buried at sea.
My husband will be buried at sea, in the same
way."
  "Sorry, Angelique, but you're wrong,"
Jamie said. "I was there, I'd just joined
Struan's, an apprentice China trader fresh
from England, and went to the funeral. It was an
immense affair, all Hong Kong went. There was
even a huge, separate procession in Chinatown
organized by Gordon Chen."
  "Sorry, Jamie, but you are wrong. An
empty coffin was interred in the crypt, he was
buried at sea with his mistress, May-may, in
international waters off Hong Kong." She felt
tears near. No tears, she ordered herself, not
yet. "He was buried at sea. It was a
Christian service, done correctly as he
wished, and the witnesses were Culum and Tess
Struan, Gordon Chen and Aristotle Quance."
  "That's not possible," Jamie said.
  "Oh yes it is and that's what happened. Your
Church hierarchy refused to allow them to be buried
together, refused them a Christian burial in
hallowed ground in Happy Valley."
  "But, Angelique, I saw the funeral.
He was buried there, I don't know where
May-may was buried but I agree, she wasn't
with him."
  "You saw a sham, Jamie, the coffin was
empty."
  "This is nonsense," Sir William said.
  "The hierarchy were adamant against a joint
burial," she said as though he had not spoken.
"It was unheard of. They had been scandalized
by Dirk Struan for many reasons, as you know only
too well, Sir William, but the idea was
too much for them. In his will, part of his Testament
that's handed down from tai-pan to tai-pan, he had
written two weeks before he died that if he and
May-may died together, they were to be buried together,
that it was his intention to marry her and--"
  "He actually wrote that? He was going to marry
her?" Sir William said, the others equally
shocked, for even today, marriage to a Chinese was
unthinkable--ostracism would be permanent, even for
Dirk Struan. "He actually wrote that?"
  "Yes," she said, seeing that Hoag alone did
not share Sir William's consternation.
  The English, the British, are such awful people in
many ways, she was thinking. Such hypocrites,
bigots, uncivilized and different from us, only
too aware of their antagonism to marriage of
Protestant to Catholic, let alone their
detestation of intermarriage with peoples of their
Empire.
  Why consider intermarriage a heinous sin, she
wanted to shout, while you have native mistresses
and children by them openly, such hypocrisy! It's never
been like that with us, in our French colonies or
Empire. If a Frenchman marries a
native woman she becomes not only his wife but
French with all the protection of French law.
We even encourage intermarriage, correctly.
A man is a man a woman a woman whatever
the color of her skin but not to you people. God
protect me from becoming English, thank God
I can never give up my French citizenship
whoever I marry ...
  What am I saying, she thought with a jolt,
bringing herself back to the room and these enemies of her
husband. Time enough for such luxury later.
  "I find some British attitudes
difficult to understand, Sir William, about
intermarriage, but then I am French. That
aside, with the funeral of my husband's grandfather there
was an impasse: your Church was outraged and would not
agree to joint burial. The new tai-pan, his
son, Culum, was insisting on it--anything other
than a proper Christian burial for Dirk
Struan was unthinkable, Culum more so than Tess
who was very disturbed by Dirk's wishes and his flouting
of conventions that were the bedrock of all her beliefs.
Her father, Tyler Brock, now the most powerful
trader on the island was vehemently opposed, so was
Tess's mother, so were most traders publicly,
whatever they felt in private. The Governor
supported the Church."
  "Quite right," Sir William muttered.
  "Yes," she said. "If Hong Kong had been
Catholic my Church would have been equally
hostile. So the scandal threatened the
Colony, and this when most of Hong Kong lay in
ruins after the typhoon--with no ice," she added
thinly.
  They shifted in their seats, except Skye who
slouched in his chair with the same slight smile.
  Babcott said gently, "It's normal,
correct medical practice for important people
in these circumstances, Angelique. Your husband
was and is important to us. You must believe that."
  "I do." She took her eyes off him and
addressed Sir William as before, continuing in the
same matter-of-fact way: "To break the
impasse, a compromise was arranged. The
compromise was arranged by Aristotle Quance and
Gordon Chen, it was verbal, nothing in writing.
Quietly--the word should be secretly because that was
what it was--the bodies were put aboard China
Cloud. The Church of England ceremony was
officiated at by a Naval Chaplain and
Captain Orlov. It was a proper Christian
burial. Dirk Struan and his mistress,
May-may Sheng were buried together as he had
desired."
  "If it was so secret how do you know this's
true?"
  "It was recorded in the ship's log, Sir
William, which was at once put into the
tai-pan's private vault and all witnesses,
Culum and Tess Struan, Aristotle Quance,
and Gordon Chen, and of course the minimum crew
aboard were sworn by holy oath to secrecy. The
Naval Chaplain, who he was I don't know, was
sent back to England at once. The other funeral
took place with all the pomp due the tai-pan
of the Noble House."
  The silence stayed in the room, broken only
by the breath of the wind against the windowpanes, the afternoon
outside fair. Sir William said, "Have you
seen the log?"
  "No, nor spoken to ... to his mother about
it."
  Jamie said, "Tess Struan could
corroborate it, or Gordon Chen--if they
would agree to break their oath--and if they wanted
to."
  Skye straightened in his chair. "This morning
Mrs. Struan asked me if this story her late
husband had told her was true. Happily I was
able to corroborate certain details."
  "And you know it's true because?"
  "I happened to meet one of the crew who was
less susceptible to secrecy than the others. A
seaman, Hennery Fairchild--I've no idea
if he's alive or dead now--but when I first
came to Hong Kong, Sir William, I
made it my business to learn all I could about the
Noble House, the Brocks, Quance, about the
founding of Hong Kong, and the ... the various
corruptions that took place in high places."
  Sir William nodded sourly, finding his bad
breath and bad teeth more overpowering than usual,
knowing some of the dirty scandals that had been kept from
public view and had preceded him. "That's
hearsay evidence."
  "It would not have much weight in court, Sir
William. But it is true."
  What to do? the Minister asked himself. Have to do the
right thing, by God. The judgment of Paris? No,
this is all a typhoon in a wineglass. "Very
well, Madam, by all means let us respect
his wishes. Jamie send the body at once
to Hong Kong for burial at sea, at once,"
he said crisply, and thought, once there Tess
Struan can have at Angelique Struan and I'm
damned if I'm going to get between them. What the
devil's come over Angelique, never seen such
a change! "Quite understand you are loath to go
by Prancing Cloud. We'll arrange the mail
ship."
  "Thank you," Angelique said calmly, "but
no, Sir William. My late husband will not
be sent like a carcass, in ice, to Hong Kong.
He will not."
  "By God, Madame, if I order it, it will
happen."
  "True, if you order it. But, Sir
William ..." She glanced at Skye.
"What is the legal position?"
  "Legally the wishes of the husband, supported
by his widow would take precedence."
  "Before I answer that where is there any proof?
There's none. As to preference over whom?" Sir
William said testily, "Over Mrs.
Struan, Tess Struan, is that what you are
saying? We should disregard any consideration of her?"
  Skye began to answer but Angelique motioned
him to stop, and said, "Not at all. If
Prancing Cloud went at once. A fast time
to Hong Kong is ten days there and ten days back,
in fair weather. A few days to turn
around. Dr. Hoag, is there time for your, your
ice," she said distastefully, "to preserve my
husband's mortal remains properly over that time
for his mother to be brought here--if she wished to come?"
  Hoag was thinking about Dirk Struan and his
legendary May-may, his beloved beauty, and about
intermarriage and how he himself wished he had not
killed his wife, love of his life.
  He often felt he had. His love for her should
have been great enough not to have married her, not to have taken
her out of her safe, serene Indian life into the
disaster he knew would be their lot. And was.
  Once again your future is in the balance,
Hoag old man. Do you help this girl or
Tess Struan? Don't forget it was your fault
that bloody assassin lived to frighten her, near
to death. "Medically it might be, but I would
advise against it," he said with a sideways glance
at Babcott, cautioning him not to interfere. "The
decision, Sir William, is really whether he
should be sent back or not. If not, I think he
should be buried as ... as his wife wants."
  Sir William hesitated, irritated that his
solution was not accepted. "Angelique, why are
you opposed to going with the body to Hong Kong, if not
by Prancing Cloud by mail ship?"
  "I am opposed because then he will not be buried in
the way that he wishes, like his grandfather--his mother would
never admit the other story, could not. I am his
widow and I tell you his wishes are my wishes,
with all my heart."
  Sir William was unsure of his legal
grounds for assenting or dissenting, and massively
concerned about Tess Struan, her position now as
de facto head of the Noble House, her written
opposition to the marriage, and what she would do if
the body was not sent back.
  She'll scream bloody murder for one thing,
he thought, almost wincing. Obviously she'd want
the burial there, it should be there, at sea or not at
sea, whatever the truth or untruth of the story, and
fifty pounds against a bent farthing in any event
she'll try and overturn the marriage, with a fair
chance of doing it. So you poor lady, like it or not,
are on a very dicey wicket. "I'm afraid you
are making an already tragic happening even more
complicated than it need be. The poor fellow can
be buried at sea just as easily from Hong Kong
as here. So the best thing ..."
  "Excuse me for butting in, Sir
William," Skye said, then added as a
brilliant Queen's Counsel cross-examining
would, "But unless you are formally challenging the
legality of my client's marriage, she does
have certain rights. May I therefore ask you
to approve that her late husband's wishes and hers
prevail in this matter and let him be buried
here." Then, the same Queen's Counsel finishing
his summation for the defense, he said so softly,
kindly: "Malcolm Struan was ours,
Yokohama's, as much as theirs. His tragedy
began here, his should end here."
  In spite of her resolve, Angelique
felt the tears begin. But she gave no sound of
crying.

                 

  For an hour after Sir William and the others
left Skye and Jamie argued. She listened.
Nothing they said made any difference. She had
lost. Following Skye's impassioned appeal,
Sir William pronounced: "I regret
I've heard nothing here this afternoon to change my
mind. The body should go back to Hong Kong for
burial, either with Prancing Cloud or the mail
ship. As you choose, Madam. This meeting is
over."
  Skye said bitterly, "If we were in Hong
Kong I could apply for a writ on a dozen
grounds, but here Sir William is court,
judge and jury. There isn't time enough to go there and
back whatever we do."
  "Then there's nothing more to be done." Jamie was
grim, rocked by her story. "You have to accept it,
Angelique. There's nothing more to be done, God
rot it."
  "I cannot go to Hong Kong--I must be at the
burial."
  "I agree," Skye said, nodding.
  "Why? What's to stop you, Angelique?"
Jamie asked.
  "Tess Struan," she said.
  "What can she do? She can't stop you going to the
funeral and she can't break the marriage.
Nettlesmith's afternoon editorial says it's
perfectly legal even though you're both minors.
Go with the mail ship, I'll get her to sail at
the same time."
  "No. Sorry, Jamie, Mr.
Skye already said the editorial is only an
opinion. I know Tess Struan won't bury
him at sea as he wanted, I'm sure she
won't. And she will attack me in any way she
can. Here, read her letters to Malcolm."
  Both men were jolted by the intensity of venom.
Skye said queasily, "Pity, there's nothing
actionable in them. She'd claim they were private
letters from a mother to a son, desperately warning him
against marriage as is her right, even to forbid it--as
is her right. And the threats against you, you as a
person, Mrs. Struan, there's nothing we could
attack her with."
  "That's not fair," she said.
  "Heavenly, what about "if that woman ever
steps foot in Hong Kong I'll make sure
..." eh?" Not wanting to hurt Angelique
further, Jamie did not read all of what
Tess Struan had written: I'll make
sure every decent person in Hong Kong knows her
history, her father's, uncle's and that her aunt was
an itinerant actress in a travelling group of
players, gypsies and mountebanks, and about her
own personal finances.
  "I'm not ashamed that my mother was an actress,"
she had said sharply, "even though most English
consider them harlots. She wasn't, ever. And they
weren't mountebanks. I'm not responsible for the
sins of my father--I wasn't penniless, he stole
my money, not only other people's."
  "I know." Jamie wished he had not mentioned the
letter. "Heavenly, can you get proof of Dirk's
burial with May-may?"
  "Oh yes, from Compradore Chen and Tess
herself. But neither would volunteer, or admit it,
would they? We would be jeered at and never get a
court order to open the family crypt." Skye
coughed and coughed again. "Mrs. Angelique
Struan must go with her husband's remains, if she
doesn't she'll immeasurably hurt her
position, both legally and publicly. But to go
to Hong Kong? Dangerous." He had asked
Babcott and Hoag to smooth the wording of the death
certificates but was told, as expected, it could
not be done. "In my considered opinion, Mrs.
Angelique is right not to take that risk at the
moment, Jamie. I'm concerned she'd be more
defenseless in Hong Kong than here."
  "You'd go too, you can provide any shield
necessary."
  "Yes, but there's bound to be a scandal and I
want to prevent that at all costs, for everyone's
sake. Including Tess Struan's. She's not
a bad woman if you look at her position from a
mother's point of view. My considered opinion is
that there's bound to be a stink--how to avoid it or
minimize it, that's the question."
  "Perhaps it can be contained," Jamie said.
"Tess isn't an ogre, she's always been
fair in her way."
  "She won't be fair, not with me,"
Angelique said. "I understand her. Only a
woman can really understand. She'll believe I've
stolen her eldest son and killed him. Malcolm
warned me against her."
  "To contain her we need time," Skye said.
"We need time to negotiate, and there's not enough before
a burial."
  When the two men left her, nothing had been
resolved.
  Never mind, she thought. I will bury my husband
as he wished, I will inherit his worldly goods, if
any, I will beat Tess Struan. And I will be
revenged.
  The letters had hurt, but not as much as she
expected. Her tears were not tears as before. They
had not racked her as before. Nor am I as before.
I don't understand. I'm really very strange. Will
it last? I surely hope so. Oh, Blessed
Mother, how stupid I was.
  Through the window she saw that day would soon be
night, and in the bay, ships' riding lights,
port, starboard and at their mastheads, blinked with the
rise and fall of the swell. In the fire bucket
coals settled noisily, flames flared
briefly drawing her attention back. What to do?
  "Missee?" Ah Soh stalked in.
  "Tai-tai, Ah Soh! You deaf heya?"
she said curtly. Malcolm had explained
tai-tai to her, and on his last night Malcolm
had made Ah Tok, Ah Soh and Chen
address her as such in front of him--and Skye
had also reminded her to make the servants use it.
  "Missee wan' my pack chop chop?"
  "Tai-tai. You deaf, heya?"
  "You wan' my pack, chop chop ...
tai-tai?"
  "No. Tomorrow. If at all," she added
quietly.
  "Missee?"
  She sighed. "Tai-tai!"
  "Missee-tai-tai?"
  "Go away!"
  "Med'sin man wan' see-ah."
  She was going to say, Go away again, then changed
her mind. "Medicine man what?"
  "Med'sin frog, missee tai-tai."
  Hoag. Yes, he is froglike, she thought
and was surprised to find that she was smiling. "Yes.
See now," and when he came in she said,
"Evening, Doctor. How are you? I'm fine,
thanks to you."
  "Are you?" His eyes were red from fatigue,
face pasty and puglike as ever but still a warmth about
him that was comely. He peered at her. "Yes, I
can see that. Be cautious, don't press yourself,
take it easy, Angelique, be wise."
  "I will, I promise."
  "You were marvelous this afternoon."
  "But I lost."
  "Yes. George Babcott and I were sorry
about that, outraged after your story and Heavenly's
appeal. George's seeing Wee Willie for
dinner and will try again but I, we, we don't
hold out much hope." He saw her shrug, just a
small gesture, and continue watching him, eyes
enormous in the paleness of her face. "Do you
need anything? To sleep or to calm--no, I can
see you don't need any calming. I'm glad,
so glad. I wanted to talk to you, chat, do you
mind?"
  "Of course not, please sit down. How did
the inquest go? Oh, there's whisky or other
drinks there if you want."
  "Thanks." On the sideboard Waterford
glasses and cut-glass decanters were lined up
like soldiers in silver holders, with silver
labels around their necks, the silver
Georgian: Whisky, Cognac, Sherry,
Port. He chose whisky and poured himself half
a glass. "The inquest went as expected,
Edward Gornt was exonerated of any blame and
commended for bravery. The coroner, Skye, found
that Greyforth's death was accidental and Gornt
perfectly correct in trying to stop what could have
been a brutal murder. We were surprised he
used such strong words even though it was the truth."
He sat facing her, raised his glass.
"Health!"
  "Salut! I'm glad for Edward.
He deserves much praise."
  "And so do you. Your story touched me deeply,"
Hoag said.
  "It's true. Don't you believe me either?"
  "I believe it. That's what I wanted
to talk about. You see, I understand it only too
well." Then, eloquently, Hoag told her his
own story, of his days in the Indian Army and
falling in love and marrying against all conventions, the
ostracism immediate, awful, then going home. Nothing
better there. "It was worse in fact. Arjumand
died, that was her name, the same as the beloved of
Shah Jahan, who built the Taj Mahal,"
he said, his eyes locked into the fire, telling the
story to the fire as well, seeing pictures of
her there, her and him in the grand days before marriage.
"I'm so sad and yet glad that she didn't linger
in the hatred, that she caught cold and died quickly
like a gorgeous hothouse plant in an icy
draft--that's what she was, you can't believe how
exquisite, any more than I can believe she
loved me--I know how ugly I look. I
loved her to madness, and killed her."
  "When you speak of her your face changes. You
didn't kill her. It was fate. You weren't
responsible." There's that word again, she thought.
  "I was, marrying her and taking her home.
May-may would have died too, forlorn, lonely and
desperate for home. Even the great Dirk
Struan himself couldn't buck public opinion, not
if they'd married. They were both lucky to have died
like that."
  She watched him, his eyes misty. "Was
Malcolm lucky to have died, like he died? I
mean, you said he was so peaceful. Was he dying
anyway?"
  Hoag said, "I'm afraid so. He could have
gone any day, any hour. He was on borrowed
time and I think he knew it."
  This rattled her. "Why wasn't he told,
why didn't you warn him, warn us?"
  "It was an Act of God--we didn't know,
not for certain as we do now, impossible to know or
we would have."
  "I, I don't understand. Tell me the truth,
please, I need to understand."
  Gently Hoag said, "His insides, under and
near the wound were worse than we'd thought.
George couldn't probe around the wound much when he
was brought in, that would have killed him
anyway. The autopsy showed he was rotting
away."
  "The operation, it was well done?"
  "Oh yes, first class. George's repair
job was admirable, as good as anyone could do," he
said and she believed him. "You see,
Angelique, we can't replace, we can only
repair, there was sepsis in pockets--the reason
for all the pain, poor fellow--and bad lesions that
prevented him from straightening up." He added
sadly, "He was on the last of borrowed time.
Even so I'm certain you made his last days the
happiest any man could have."
  A coal fell into the hearth. Her eyes went
to it. The flame flared and flickered and died--just like
my Malcolm, poor man, poor love.
"Sad," she said to the fire, "so sad."
  Hoag was weighing her, weighing himself and the
memory of Arjumand--whom Angelique had
reborn for him. Easy to decide now, after sharing
Arjumand, he thought. Nervously he finished the
drink. "May I?"
  "Of course. Please."
  Hoag replenished his glass, not so amply.
"About the burial, that's what I really wanted
to see you about. You could, possibly, still do what you
and Malcolm wanted."
  "What?"
  He sat opposite her again. "Bury him at
sea like his grandfather, like he wanted, like you want.
I can help you."
  "How?"
  He mopped his brow. "You go to Sir
William, say you'll bow to the inevitable and as
much as you deplore his decision, you will allow the
body to be sent to Hong Kong. Tomorrow, we,
Babcott and I, we officially put his coffin
aboard Prancing Cloud from Kanagawa where it
is at the moment. You see the coffin off,
officially, saying you could not bear to go with it on
Prancing Cloud but you'll go by mail ship the
day after tomorrow when she sails for Hong Kong.
Everyone's satisfied."
  "But the coffin is empty?" she said
excitedly.
  He shook his head, his brow and jowls glistening
in the firelight. "No. There'll be a body in
it but not his, a fisherman, a Korean, who died
in Kanagawa this morning, at the clinic.
Meanwhile Malcolm's remains are
in the other coffin, still secretly at Kanagawa.
If Jamie was with us, he could bring the cutter there
tomorrow evening, we go out to sea and if we could get
Tweet to officiate, Malcolm can be buried as
you wish. The next day you catch the mail ship and
no one's the wiser--if we can swear everyone
to secrecy."
  "So many "ifs,"" she muttered, her heart
thumping.
  "Many more that I've thought of," he said, drying his
forehead, throat tight. "It was just ... The idea
jumped into me a little while ago. I haven't
thought it through, I may be quite off the mark, but I
wanted to help. With or without George I can do
the first part. Substituting the bodies. You have to do
the other things. Perhaps I can help, I don't
know," adding lamely, "I'm not good at keeping
secrets. Sorry, we have to decide now if
... I'll have to get back to Kanagawa tonight
while George is dining here. What do you think?"
  She was out of her chair in a flash and put her
arms around him, embracing him in a perfumed
envelope of softness and gratitude. "Let's
try ... and thank you thank you."

  "You wanted to see me, Ma'am?" Gornt
said.
  "Yes, please come and sit down."
Angelique sat by the bay window of the
tai-pan's office where lounging chairs, an oak
table and sideboard were. Chen stood nearby.
  "May I say again how sorry I am about
all this. If there's anything I can do, you only have
to ask, Ma'am."
  "I know, thank you, Edward. Yes, you can
help, we all need friends. I'm glad the
inquest went properly--you should get a medal. It
was very brave of you, I'd like to thank you for
Jamie, I don't know what I would do without
him." A good fire burned in the hearth and fine
Thai silk curtains shut out the night. Chen
went over to the ice bucket with the opened bottle.
"My husband said you liked champagne?"
  "Sure, yes, Ma'am, yes I do,"
Gornt said, thinking of the inquest and the heavenly
verdict that put the dangerous Norbert chapter
to bed. The coroner, Heavenly Skye, was well
named.
  She motioned to Chen who poured two tall
glasses.
  "Doh jeh"--thanks, Gornt said,
accepting his glass.
  Chen gaped at him as though he had not understood,
despising this impertinent foreign devil even more for
daring to speak a civilized dialect.
  Angelique said, "Chen, you wait outside.
If want, I use bell, heya?" She
indicated the silver bell on the side table.
  "Yes, Missee."
  She glared at him. "Tai-tai!"
  "Yes, Missee-tai-tai." Chen left,
pleased with small victories. The servants had
requested a conference that he had chaired. Ah
Tok, her mind wandering, had wanted them to employ
a soothsayer to put the Evil Eye on this
"Possessor of a Death-filled Duct," but
he had said, "No, we can't--and it isn't. The
Master's death was not her doing. The Master married
her and made us call her tai-tai in front of
him and her. Our compromise is to call her
"Missee" first, then "Missee-tai-tai"
until the matter is decided by Illustrious
Chen, to whom my urgent, detailed report is
already aboard Prancing Cloud."
  "Salut, Edward."
  "Your health, Ma'am!"
  She took the tiniest sip, he drank with
enjoyment.
  "Champagne's a source of life for me,"
he said, immediately wishing he had not said it that way.
"I've never been able to afford it, except on
festive occasions."
  "I like champagne too, though not tonight. But
soon you'll be able to afford all you want, no?
My husband told me your affairs were going
to improve, tremendously, and that you had many
secrets to share with him--for mutual profit."
  "He did?" Gornt was caught off guard for
he and Malcolm Struan had agreed to tell no
one else. Norbert? Norbert didn't count,
that was just more of the plan to confuse the enemy and
Norbert had always been enemy. "Secrets,
Ma'am?"
  "He told me he liked you, trusted you, as
I do, that you were a man who could keep secrets as
well as know them, and who understood the value of
old friends--in the Chinese sense."
  "That part's true. I liked and trusted him
too."
  "Jamie said you've booked
passage on Prancing Cloud."
  "Yes, that's right, Ma'am."
  "My husband said you were going to give him
special information about how to ruin the Brocks. You
were going to tell him yesterday morning after ... was it
only yesterday? It seems a lifetime ago--for
Malcolm it was, poor Malcolm."
  He sighed, sad for her. "Yes. May I
say you've changed, Ma'am? You're different.
Without wanting to be impertinent, or callous,
may I say the change suits you very much."
  "I would prefer ten thousand time to have my husband
alive, and not to have changed." Her openness
surprised her, though like Malcolm, she had always
found Gornt easy to talk to. "I'm not yet
sure about the change, if I like it. Growing up so
fast is, I don't know the right word, is aching,
scare-making." She got up and refilled his
glass, then put the iced champagne bucket on
the table, closer to him.
  "Thanks," he said, aware of her more than ever
before.
  "I've decided not to go to Hong Kong by the
clipper."
  "Ah, yes, Ma'am. I'd heard the
rumor, something about you not wanting to go aboard her
again--or your husband's remains--that you go by mail
ship." As soon as he had heard, for safety,
he had seen the agent to reserve passage also but
all cabins were taken. Cursing, he had tried
to find Jamie but Jamie was not in the building.
"I can understand you not wanting to go on the Cloud."
  Her hands were tranquil in her lap, her
voice quiet and as controlled. "These secrets
you were going to tell my husband, will you tell them
to me?"
  He smiled his nice smile, fascinated
by her, and shook his head. "Sorry, Ma'am, no
--even if I had any."
  She nodded, not offended. "I didn't expect
you to, I'm sure I wouldn't understand them if you
did, and then, I could never put them into effect
anyway, could I?" He smiled. "But Tess
Struan can, no?"
  "Ma'am?"
  "My husband told me you said if anything
happened to him, you would go at once to Hong Kong
to deal directly with his mother, to make the same
arrangement with her you had made with him. He said you
were doing this because you hated the Brocks--
he didn't tell me why you hated them." She
reached up and toyed with the stem of her glass.
"Tess Struan could certainly use the information,
if what you claim is true, no? This was
Tuesday, before we were married."
  Again, he just watched her, a pleasant
expression on his handsome face.
  "I can understand why my husband liked you,
Edward, why you'd be a dangerous enemy, and even
more dangerous a friend."
  This made him laugh outright and the tension between them
broke. "Not to you, Ma'am, never, I swear it.
Never."
  "We'll see. We have many bridges to cross
you and I, for, by God, as my husband would say,
I am embracing his hopes and dreams as my own:
that you can help Struan's destroy the Brocks,
once and for all. Perhaps your hopes and dreams
too."
  "Mine?"
  She opened her bag and took out the paper she
had found in the safe's inner compartment, held it
closer to the light to see better and read aloud:
""This is my solemn agreement with Mr.
Edward Gornt, gentleman, of Rothwell's in
Shanghai: if information provided by him assists
Struan's to break Brock and Sons, causing
them to go under within the next six months, on behalf
of Struan's I guarantee that he will receive from their
wreckage, the Brock 50% interest in
Rothwell's free and clear, that we will assist
him in good faith, as best we can, with the Victoria
Bank to raise the necessary loan to purchase the other
50% belonging to Jefferson Cooper, that from this
date, for twenty years, Struan's grants
him, or any company he personally controls,
favored nation status on any mutually agreed
business dealings.""
  She held it for him to see but did not hand it
over. "It's dated the day before yesterday, Edward,
signed but not witnessed."
  He made no move to take it. His eyesight
was good. While she was reading it he had
recognized the signature. Without the witness it
doesn't have its real value, he thought, his mind
moving rapidly from plan to plan, from question to question,
to answers. "So?"
  "I could witness my husband's signature."
  His mind stopped churning with a jolt. "A wife
witnessing her husband's signature
isn't usually valid."
  "Say I witnessed it the same day--before we were
married."
  Where the devil's she getting all this from? he was
thinking frantically. Jamie? Heavenly? She's
like one of Stevenson's new steam rollers.
"Even if, even if the paper was witnessed, it
wouldn't bind the Noble House."
  "Yes, but it would carry weight with Tess
Struan--it would be an agreement with her son.
Doesn't it confirm you were working with my husband,
clandestinely, to deliver her the greatest ambition of
her life?"
  "Perhaps, perhaps it would, Ma'am." He
hesitated. "Jamie approves of the document?"
  "He doesn't know about it. No one does
except me," she told him, believing it. Why
else would Malcolm hide it?
  Thoughtfully, he poured some wine--he noticed
she had not touched hers further. "I imagine,"
he said delicately, "such a favor would
require one in return, Ma'am."
  "I would like you to hurry by Prancing Cloud with
all speed, as you planned, and see Tess
Struan. And deliver a letter from me."
  His eyes widened with disbelief. "That's all?"
  "Not exactly. When you arrive Hong Kong--
the clipper will be there long before the mail ship--you
must get to her before she hears the tragic news of
my husband's death from anyone else. It is
essential that you get to her first, telling her you
bring her terrible news but also secret information,
vital information that guarantees the ruin of
Brocks forever, that will put them out of business forever
quickly." She took a deep breath. "It will
won't it?"
  "Yes," he said softly, no longer a need
to deny it.
  "Next, tell her the Brocks had planned
to murder Malcolm, using Norbert Greyforth.
Third that ..."
  "They what?"
  "Isn't that true? Wasn't that part of Tyler
Brock's plot? Or Morgan's? Certainly
Jamie is of that opinion--he would swear to it.
Mr. Skye told me about the duel, the rest I
forced from Jamie--why there was a duel. Wasn't
Norbert just a pawn for murder?"
  "Maybe," Gornt said, overwhelmed by her.
"Probably. Next?"
  "Next." Her voice became quieter but
oddly, clearer: "Please tell her it's because of
me you're bringing her the evidence to destroy
Brock's--you must keep stressing that."
  "Because of you?"
  "Because of me. Yes. Emphasize that. It's
important to me, not much to ask, and you will get
what you want anyway."
  "You're sure?"
  "Yes. You tell her you were going to forget this
written contract you had with her son, believing it
to be valueless now. But because I asked you, pleaded
with you to see her in his stead, you decided to rush
to Hong Kong to see her." She leaned closer.
"The information, must it be acted on quickly?"
  "Yes," he said.
  "Then emphasize that. But most of all, keep
stressing it was I who persuaded you to go to her, my
pleading persuaded you to see her to give her the
evidence to destroy Malcolm's enemies and hers
... that I assured you she would honor the
contract, or give you an equivalent. And she
will. Tess Struan will, I guarantee."
  "With your signature?"
  "That's the first thing she will notice, so mention it
in advance. Say Malcolm asked me to witness
his signature, saying only it was a business
contract between you two, which I did in front of you,
without thought--on Monday, before the party. I
didn't read it, nor ask about it. Last, say
you have an urgent letter from me, and give it to her."
Angelique picked up her glass. "If she
reads it in front of you, she probably won't,
but if she does, I'd like to know what she says
or does."
  Now she took a second sip, leaned back,
waiting, her eyes locked on his.
  Her face still told him nothing. "What's in the
letter?"
  "You may read it, if you wish, before I seal
it." She added lightly, without spite, "It will
save you the bother of opening it."
  His mind was pondering the conundrum of her.
"And the news of his death, your marriage and his death,
how do I tell her that and all the rest?"
  "I don't know, Edward. You will know how to do
that."
  He grunted, astounded by the gall, no not
gall, more by the cunning. Obviously, her goal was
to slide into Tess's favor out of the
existing enmity, and to forestall any action, civil
or criminal, that a mother such as Tess Struan,
torn apart by the agony of her loss, might, will,
unleash against her--the current betting five to one
Tess Struan would, two to one she would win.
  Never mind that, this strategy could squeeze
Angelique into the winner's circle--could. With
care, not quite as she had suggested it, much more subtly
than that, he could do what she proposed without harming
his own position and make his deal with Tess who would
certainly give him everything he wanted--once the
shock of her son's death had lessened and she could
appreciate the enormity of what he had to offer.
  Better for me to ease Angelique off the
Tess Struan barb, much better. What should I
ask in return? Her signature, of course but
what else? What else do I want from her?
There are all kinds of gambit I co--
  Angelique was reaching for the pen. Her face was
grave as she signed her name as witness, dating it
the day before yesterday. Silently she powdered it
dry, blew the excess away, and placed it in
front of him, her eyes still downcast.
  "Whatever you decide, this is yours now,
freely," she said, gambling on his
well-advertised sense of honor. "As for the
rest, if you help me, Edward," now she looked
up at him, something inside of him stirred
deliciously, "you would also have my gratitude,
my undying gratitude, forever."

  Inside the shoya's dwelling, Jamie sat
cross-legged on the tatami, shoeless, Hiraga
opposite him. At the head of the table was the
shoya, and sak`e and tea.
  For an hour or more Jamie had answered and
asked questions, Hiraga translating, hesitating
over the strange words, wanting further
explanations to understand clearly. Jamie was tired,
not because of the time spent here, a fascinating and a
welcome relief from all his other troubles, but because
there seemed to be no solution to them. He had been
upset by Sir William's refusal to be
swayed over the burial, though understanding perfectly
--he would have done the same in his position. Poor
Angelique, poor Malcolm, poor Noble
House. Even poor bloody Tess.
  Something has to give. It won't be Wee
Willie. It has to be Angelique--there's
nothing she or anyone can do. This time I
think it will break her.
  As simply as he could he had laid out his
idea for a joint venture, the shoya and his contacts
supplying the goods on consignment they agreed on,
Jamie supplying the European know-how, a six
months leeway for payment which would give time for the
goods to be sold and the money either to come back, or
to be reinvested in mass-produced goods that they, in
return, would advise the joint venture
to import. This led into a discussion of
quantities, then into mass production methods
that could make them all rich.
  "Shoya ask: What cost your massu
produk'shun machine?"
  "It depends what the machines are to make,"
Jamie said.
  "Jami-sama, he ask you, p'rease, you say
what goods to make to se're in Ing'rund. Not
now, in three day, p'rease. If shoya agree,
perhaps make stoku kompeni and bring massu
produk'shun machine to Nippon."
  Jamie smiled. "Mass production is
initially expensive to set up, machines and
factory. It's not like the joint venture I
suggested. There's no way I could raise that much
money."
  "Jami-sama, you not worry, not worry about
money. Gyokoyama can buy-se're Yedo if
want." Hiraga smiled grimly as Jamie
blinked. "Shoya thank you and I thank you.
P'rease, in three days, you say what to make and
price. I see you home."
  "No need for that, thanks."
  Hiraga bowed, the shoya bowed, Jamie bowed
back equally and went into the evening air.
  "Tea, Sire?" the shoya asked.
  Hiraga nodded a yes, preparing to leave,
needing a bath and massage, but pleased with himself,
everything done now except to collect Jami
Mukfey's supposed fee of the three koku.
  The shoya ordered fresh tea. When the maid
had gone, he said, "I have some news. By carrier
pigeon, Otami-sama, about Lord Yoshi, and
about the shishi you might like to hear."
  "Stop playing games! Of course I wish
to hear." Now that he was alone with the shoya,
Hiraga became imperious and samurai without
noticing it. "What news?"
  "There's been another attempt on Lord
Yoshi."
  "He's dead?" Hiraga said hopefully.
  "No, Otami-sama, here, please read for
yourself." With pretended meekness the shoya offered the
sliver of paper, the same he had previously
shown to Raiko and Meikin: An assassination
attempt on Yoshi at dawn at Hamamatsu
village failed. Lone shishi assassin slain
by him. Lady Koiko also dead in skirmish.
Inform Wisteria our great sadness. More information
soon as possible.
  Hiraga read it, and gasped. "When did this
happen?"
  "Five days ago, Otami-sama."
  "Nothing further?"
  "Not yet."
  Reading the message, his headache seemed
to become even worse, his thoughts jumbled. Koiko
dead, another shishi dead! Who? If she's dead
what about Sumomo? "You've informed the House of
Wisteria?"
  "Yes, Otami-sama."
  "What did Meikin say?"
  "She was distraught, Otami-sama,
naturally."
  "What else do you know, shoya?"
  "What I know that affects you and shishi, I
tell you."
  "What about Katsumata and Takeda?"
  "The word, Sire, they were still travelling towards
us, as, supposedly, Lord Yoshi is."
  "When does he arrive back? Has he
changed his plans now?" he asked, his mind
tumbling. If Koiko was killed in the
skirmish, was it by accident, or had Yoshi
discovered Koiko had tentacles to us, as Meikin
has? "Eh?"
  "I don't know. Perhaps about eight days,
Otami-sama." The shoya studied Hiraga's
concern and thought that, yes, this youth should be concerned for
obviously he is in great danger, but eeee, how
valuable he is! I agree he is a National
Treasure, or should be. Joint-u ven'shur!
--a godlike idea! My son will go to work with this
Jami gai-jin starting tomorrow, to learn barbarian
ways and then I will not need Hiraga who
represents nothing but trouble to me directly, and
so sorry, is doomed. Like we all are, if we
are not very clever. "Otami-sama, there are many
troop movements around us."
  "Eh? What kind of movements?"
  "The Bakufu have reinforced the three nearest
Tokaid@o way stations to us. Also, also there are
five hundred samurai straddling the road north
and south of us." A bead of sweat slid down his
cheek. "We are in a box of Tair@o
Anjo."
  Hiraga cursed and, too, felt the
pressure increase. "What do you hear, shoya?
Is he planning to attack us here?"
  "I wish I knew, Otami-sama. Perhaps
telling the Taira about the troops might help
to find out what the gai-jin plan."
  "They'll bombard Yedo, any fool knows
that." Hiraga felt sickened at the thought of the
inevitable gai-jin victory though it would serve
sonno-joi like nothing else. "There's nothing the
tair@o can do to prevent ..." His heart
skipped a beat and he stopped.
  "Except, Otami-sama?"
  "Except history's answer, the usual
answer: a sudden, brutal, surprise attack
to destroy the fleet's base." Hiraga was
astonished he had shared his thought, and been so open with
such a lowly person, even though the shoya was
intelligent, a valuable ally, and soon to be a
business partner.
  Eeee, he told himself through the throbbing of his
headache, there's so much I do not understand, the world is
turning upside down, everything different, I am
different, no longer samurai yet totally
samurai. It is these filthy gai-jin with their
tempting, sickening, awesome, greed-making ideas.
They must be thrown out--sonno-joi sonno-joi
sonno-joi--but not yet. First massu
produk'shun, the first to make rifles.
  "Shoya, send out all spies in case that is
Anjo's plan."
  "Spies, Otami-sama?"
  Hiraga said, "The time is now to stop playing
games. Shoya. You understand? No-more-games!"
  "I obey in everything, Otami-sama. As
usual, as I ha--"
  "You did very well tonight, shoya. The moment you
hear anything about Yoshi or shishi, send me word,
please." Hiraga added the "please" as a
major concession.
  "As quick as a hunting sea bird, Sire."
  "Good night then--ah, so sorry, I forgot,
there is the gai-jin's fee. He asked me
to remind you."
  The shoya's stomach turned over. From his
sleeve he extracted a small bag--it would have
been very bad manners to give it to Jami-sama
direct. "Here is the equal in gold oban for
one and a half koku, Otami-sama, the rest in
ten days."
  Hiraga shrugged and casually put it in his own
sleeve, but the weight of it and the joy of it
astonished him. "I will tell him, and see he is
here in three days."
  "Thank you, Otami-sama. These troop
movements, terribly worrisome. War is coming.
My Masters say if they could have advance warning of
gai-jin plans ... they would appreciate
deeply any help. Perhaps your Taira-sama
..." Hopefully, he left the name hanging.
  Another message from Head Office in
Osaka had arrived today, more urgent than the last.
As if I cannot read? the shoya thought angrily, as
if I'm uncaring and disloyal. I do everything I
can. It is those two cursed mama-sans. Two
days and still nothing from them!
  Before he had left Raiko and Meikin he had
impressed on them his urgent need to know everything
they knew, or could find out, quickly. His anger
began to increase, not only because the two women had
pretended to know nothing however much he cajoled them,
even though he was sure that they already had an inkling,
but also because his precious gold oban were in this
rapacious samurai's sleeve, fees, however
well earned for an equally rapacious gai-jin.
And where will all my lovely oban end up? Of
course in some whore's Golden Gully.
  "Thank you so much, Otami-sama," the shoya
said unctuously, as Hiraga left, keeping his
head on his tatami to hide the gnashing of his few
remaining broken teeth, wanting to humble
Hiraga, make him sweat, telling him, not
sorry at all: oh so sorry, your late whore
Koiko was implicated in the plot, so was your
trained female assassin and wife-to-be
Sumomo who had her head chopped off too, and
your shishi supporter Meikin, mama-san to the
most important men in Yedo--even
Gyokoyama leaders--is not long for this earth because
we surmise Yoshi knows all this too.
  And though you're the cleverest samurai I've
known, you're doomed doomed doomed, and yet my
illustrious superiors expect me to treat you as
a National Treasure and keep you
alive as well. Oh ko!
  Tonight I shall get drunk, but not before
congratulating myself on the imminent formation of the
Ryoshi Joint-u Ven'shur Stoku
Kompeni! Eeee, an idea worthy of gods!

  Walking home, Jamie McFay loosened his
top coat though the evening air was cold. He was
warm. The knowledge gained was substantial and his
concentration had driven away his cares. All very
interesting, he thought, but neither of those two have any
idea of the initial costs of mass production.
And yet the way Nakama said Gyokoyama could
buy and sell Yedo if they wanted, for the moment
I really believed it. The shoya will go for a joint
venture, I'm sure of it.
  His step was brisk and he greeted others
walking the High Street and went up the Struan
steps, into his domain. It's mine again, he
thought, with pride. Perhaps Tess will change her
mind now--she's no fool and I've done a good
job.
  Vargas was waiting.
  "Evening, Vargas, time to lock up?"
  "Yes, but first, senhor, sorry, but these came
in yesterday's mail but, somehow, were in my In
tray."
  Both letters were marked Personal and
Confidential and addressed to him. The first was in
Tess Struan's writing. His stomach heaved.
The other was from Maureen Ross, his er/while
fianc@ee. His unease doubled. "Thanks," he
said. In spite of his resolve to wait, he could
not and tore Tess's letter open. This is to inform
you formally that Mr. Albert MacStruan is
transferred from Shanghai, arriving by steamer,
Wayfong, on the 17th. Please acquaint
him with all Japanese operations. Subject
to your noncompliance with previous letters he
assumes control at the end of December.
  His dismissal from the Noble House, now that it was
in effect, did not anger him as he expected.
In fact he was relieved. Weird, just a few
moments ago I thought it was my ...
  He looked up at Vargas who was watching
narrowly. "What else, Vargas?" He folded
the letter and put it on his desk with the other one.
  "Mrs. Angelique is in the tai-pan's
office. She asked if you could you see her for a
moment?"
  "What's up now?"
  "Nothing that I know of, senhor, the evening has
been peaceful. A message arrived from your
Nemi, asking if you would be visiting later. One
small other matter, Captain Strongbow again
asked for sailing orders. Again I told him to be
patient. It will be on the evening tide?"
  "Yes. I think so. Send word to Nemi:
Perhaps."
  "At once, senhor. Then it's decided? The
tai-pan's remains will go with Cloud? And of
course the Senhora?"
  "Either by clipper, or the mail ship, one or the
other," he said, walked along the corridor,
knocked and went in.
  She was curled in Malcolm's chair, which
Jamie was coming to think of as her own, reading the
Guardian by oil light. "Hello, Jamie."
  "Evening. I've decided to go with you and the mail
ship," he tried unsuccessfully not to sound
blunt, "it's my job to explain to Tess
Struan." Having said it, he felt better.
"It's my job and I think Mal--I think he
would like me to do that, and it might spare you a little."
  "Yes," she said with her sweet smile,
"I'm sure he would. Close the door,
Jamie, and sit down a moment." When he had
obeyed, she dropped her voice and told him
Hoag's plan. "Can you bring the cutter
to Kanagawa with the rest of us tomorrow evening?"
  He was staring at her stupidly, completely off
guard. "You're crazy. That plan's crazy."
  "No, not at all. Dr. Hoag thinks ..."
  "He's over the moon too--you'd never get
away with it."
  "Why?" she asked calmly.
  "Fifty reasons," he said. "So many
reasons I'm not even going to mention any. Whole
idea's ludicrous, insane, Willie will have you
in irons."
  "There's no law against what we would be doing,
Mr. Skye says. The burial would be quite
legal, he says."
  "Mr. Bloody Know-all says that, eh? And
what else's Heavenly going to do," he asked,
"put his collar on backwards and read the
bloody service?"
  "Mr. Skye believes we can persuade the
Reverend Tweet to do that," she said as though he were
a child in a tantrum.
  He threw up his hands. "You're both crazy
and Hoag is stupid, off his head to have suggested
it. We'll leave on the mail ship, you, me, and
him." He stalked for the door.
  "Jamie, can you handle the cutter by yourself or will
we need a crew?" He turned back and stared
at her. She smiled, determined, but nicely so.
"Would we need a crew?"
  "Two men at least. Bosun, and engineer at
least."
  "Thank you. If you don't wish to help, may
I ask the Bosun, yes?"
  "I can't seem to get through to you. This idea is
foolhardy, extremely foolhardy."
  She nodded ruefully. "You're probably right
and we won't be able to do it, but I'm going to try,
and then try again. I can't seem to get through to you
either, dearest Jamie. I promised to love
honor and obey my husband and your friend, he was your
friend, and I don't feel parted from him, not yet,
nor do you. Tess Struan won't give him his
wish, will she?"
  All the time he had been looking down at her,
not seeing her and at the same time seeing every detail
of her, remembering all the years of Tess
Struan and what she and Culum Struan had
meant to him, and Malcolm Struan had meant and
Dirk Struan had meant and the Noble House had
meant. All gone and all wasted and all at an
end, our Noble House no longer noble, no longer
first in Asia. Well, not quite wasted and not quite over
but its glory's gone and my friend's dead and that's a
fact. I was his friend, but was he mine? God
Above, what we do in the name of friendship.
  He said, "Tess wouldn't bury him as he
wanted. I suppose that's the least a friend could do.
I'll arrange the cutter."
  He walked out. In the gathering quiet of the
room she sighed, picked up the paper and, once
more, began to read.

  That night, when Dr. Hoag arrived at the
Kanagawa Legation, part of the Buddhist
temple, Towery, the Sergeant-in-charge, smart
in his Guards uniform, tall hat, scarlet
tunic, white trousers and black boots, met
him. "Didn't expect you till morning,
Doc."
  "I just have to make sure everything's ready. We
want an early start."
  Escorting him to the part of the temple used as a
morgue Towery laughed. "If you left him
ready, Doc, he's ready 'cause he ain't
about to've gone walkies." He opened the
door. The room was large, with a dirt floor and
access to the grounds through shutter doors. Towery
sniffed the air. "They don't niff yet. Never
did like corpses. You want a hand?"
  "No, thank you." Two empty coffins were on
trestles, lids beside them, others standing upright against
the wall. The bodies were on marble slabs covered
with sheets. At the far end were big barrels
containing ice. Water seeped from them, discoloring the
beaten earth floor. "What about the native? How
long we've to keep him?"
  "Tomorrow." Hoag felt faint, suddenly
realizing, by custom, the body would be claimed for
cremation according to Shinto ritual but now there would be
no body ...
  "Wot's up, Doc?"
  "Nothing, just a ... thank you, Sergeant." His
heart started again as he remembered the man was
Korean, one of some shipwrecked fishermen who
eked out a pathetic existence, no way to sail
home, unwanted and despised by locals.
Babcott had agreed to have the body cremated in
the Buddhist crematorium. "Actually, you could
help, Sergeant."
  Malcolm's corpse had been cleaned and
dressed after the autopsy by their Japanese
trainee assistants. With the help of the Sergeant,
who took the feet, they placed him in the coffin.
"He looks right pretty for a corpse."
Malcolm's face was serene in death. "Let's
do t'other one, Doc. No need t'give yourself a
hernia, eh, not that this little bugger weighs but a stone
or two."
  "We'd better wrap him in his sheet."
  The Korean was skin and bones. Dysentery had
killed him. Together they put him into the coffin.
  "Thanks, I'll just tidy things up, then
turn in."
  "All right Doc. I'll make sure your
room's ready."
  Once alone Hoag bolted the door. With
Angelique's agreement, they had decided that
there would be no traditional laying-out, with the coffin
open for people to pay last respects to the dead man.
With care he slid the lid into place. It took
no time to nail it tight.
  Now the other one. There would be a great difference
in weight. What to use? Earth. There was a
shovel belonging to the gravediggers to one side--not
every body was cremated. Outside the earth was soft,
the night cold with a slight wind that rustled the
vegetation. He dug swiftly and brought
shovelfuls back, scattering the earth on and around
the corpse, packing it tightly. A few
branches filled up the gaps. Satisfied, he
levered on the lid and hammered the nails in. He
leaned against the coffin, his breathing heavy, sweaty and
dirty and even more concerned than when he started.
Heavenly's right, he thought, washing his hands in a
bucket. We'll never get away with it.
  "You're off your rocker, Doc," Skye
had said with his wheezing cough, "and so is she and so
am I to say all right, I'm in. Wee
Willie will have kittens but never mind, tomorrow night
it is." This was in the Club a few hours ago,
noisy and argumentative as always. "Have another
whisky."
  "I'll have a coffee, thanks, then I'd
better be off."
  "Her story reminded me of my Nellie,
Doc. Married I was when I was an articled
clerk, sixteen, she was fifteen, at least we
pretended we were married and lived in a garret off
Fleet Street, near the Old Cheshire
Cheese Pub, Sam Johnson's place.
She died in childbirth and the nipper, he would have
been a boy, he died too." He offered a
cigar and lit one for himself. "Pauper's grave,
a couple of pence to the nightly barrow, Bring Out
your dead, and that was the last of them. Cholera was bad
that year, dysentery too, cemeteries full
to overflowing." Heavenly spat in the spittoon.
"Haven't thought of little Nellie for years. You
been married, Doc?"'
  "Yes, once, she died in London
too."
  "Another coincidence, eh? Never felt like
getting married after Nellie--swore I'd not be
that poor again no matter what--always on the go,
travelling too much. Had lots of girls but
never did get the pox. Did you, Doc?"'
  "No." Hoag had crossed his fingers.
"Not yet."
  "Hey, you're superstitious too, like me?"'
  "Yes. You're sure of our legal position
in this?"'
  "As sure as can be, sure as shit--but if
Wee Willie wants he can trump up a
dozen charges, never fear. Listen, whatever
happens, Tess Struan will bust her knickers
and that's your stipend gone and you into the creek without a
paddle."
  "No. I'm going back to India ..."
  Strange how bad leads to good or good to bad.
All this has really decided me. I really am
going back this time, going back to Cooch Behar in
Bengal where I was stationed and where she came from.
I'm going to find her family and ... and then
we'll see. I've enough cash for that and a few years
left, our son and daughter are grown up now,
part of the tapestry of London, educated as best
I could, paid for as best I could, my sister and her
husband their real parents--both sterling and the stuff of
England.
  I'm a good doctor and God knows they need
doctors in India, even bad ones, so who
knows, maybe I can find some happiness ... I
don't even expect that, just some peace from the
full-blooded horror of the killing of her.
  Tired now he studied the two coffins. A
last look to check that everything was as it should be.
Taking the oil lamp, he went out, bolting the
door after him.
  A baleful moon cast a shadow through the open
windows. Silently another shadow moved.
Sergeant Towery peered into the morgue. He was
puzzled. Why should Doc Hoag arrive in the
dead of night, and then why dig in the garden like a
foul grave robber to pack the dead native's
coffin with earth?
  Curiosity killed the cat, me lad, but not
Yours Truly, not when I'm in charge. Tomorrow
you'll take a closer look afore the good
Doctor's awake, and afore Lord God
Almighty Pallidar arrives for inspection.
He can find the answer.

                 

              KANAGAWA

    Friday, 12th December:
  Pallidar said icily, "Well, Doctor?"
  Hoag had just been summoned. He sat on the
edge of a chair, uncomfortable and pale.
Stiff-backed and uniformed, Pallidar
was imposing even though he had a bad cold. On
the desk was his plumed hat, his sword beside it, the
early morning light glinting off the braid. Behind
him stood Sergeant Towery. Bells from the
temple toned ominously.
  Hoag shrugged meekly. "Ballast."
  "For Christ's sake, Doctor, this isn't a
court martial and personally I don't care if
you pack coffins with cow shit, kindly tell me
why you did what you did last night."
  "I ... I ... thought, thought it was a good
idea."
  "I want to know, now ..." A cough stopped
him. Exasperated, Pallidar blew his nose and
coughed, cleared his throat, and coughed again.
  Hoag said brightly, "I've, we've some
special, new cough mixture in the clinic,
it'll get rid of that cold in a jiffy, it's
got quinine in it, opium." He began to get
up. "I'll get some an--"
  "Sit down! The coffin, for Christ's sake,
not my cold! The Sergeant saw you. Rightly he
told me. Now you tell me why?"
  Hoag had twisted and turned but knew he was
trapped. Cursing the Sergeant silently, he
said, "Can, can I, can I talk to you alone,
Settry, old boy, please?"
  Pallidar glared at him. "All right.
Sergeant!" Towery saluted and marched out.
"Well?"
  "Well you see ... you see ..." Although
Hoag had decided to tell him sharply to please
mind his own business, that he wasn't subject
to military discipline anymore, thank God, you
bloody officers trampled on me before but you're
not going to do it again ... he suddenly found himself
pouring out the story in detail, ending, "So you
see, Settry, it was the weight, the difference in
weight, earth was perfect. ... Listen,
George Babcott is due any moment but
he's not to know, no one is--you know nothing--we just
send the wrong, the right coffin aboard the clipper and
tonight when the cutter arrives, God willing, we
bury him as he wanted and Angel wants."
Hoag fanned himself, feeling better, at the
same time weak with guilt. "You know nothing. Now,
now I'll get that cough mixture."
  "Will you sit down." Pallidar glowered at
him. "You're a bloody fool. First: have you
looked out of the window?"
  "Eh?" Hoag did as he was bidden. These
windows faced seawards. The sea was grey,
swell heavy and nimbus clouds had closed out the
sun, dominating the sky. "Oh!"
  "Yes, oh! There'll be a bloody storm before
dusk so no cutter burial even if it was
possible, and you know Sir William ordered a
Hong Kong burial so by God that's where it will
be."
  "But Settry, don't--"
  "Not for you, Angelique, anyone--"
Pallidar broke off with a new fit of coughing,
then added hoarsely, "Sir William's in
charge, he made a decision and that's it.
Clear?"
  "Yes, but ..."
  "No bloody but for Christ's sake. Kindly
fetch some cough medicine and stay to hell out of the
morgue. Sergeant!"
  Towery stuck his head in. "Yessir?"
  "Put a sentry on the morgue, no one to go
in without my approval. I don't want the
coffins touched."
  Hoag went off cursing himself for leaking Sir
William's decision, cursing Pallidar, the
busybody Sergeant, but mostly himself. Fuck
it, he thought. I've botched it. In the clinic
he found the cough mixture, was tempted to add some
castor oil but decided not to. "Here,
Settry, this will do the trick."
  Pallidar took some, choked. "Filthy
stuff, you sure you didn't pee in it just for
badness?"
  "I was tempted." Hoag smiled. "Sorry
for being a perfect bloody idiot. You can still
close your eyes, you could you know, Nelson
did."
  "Yes but he was Navy, we keep our eyes
on teeth marks."
  "Settry. Please?"
  Thoughtfully Pallidar sipped the medicine.
"You should comply with Sir William's order,
best in the long run. You were bound to be caught,
yesterday was the thirteenth."
  "Damn me, I didn't notice."
Hoag's attention focused on the care lines on
the good-looking face. "What's up?"
  "With me, nothing, except this lousy cold and
cough. Plenty's up in the Settlement."
  "What now?"
  "Last few days lots of enemy movement all
around us, samurai patrols, most of them covert
--just for safety we've been patrolling to the
Tokaid@o and Settlement limits so we
spotted them. Coming here samurai were stacked
ten-deep in places. They didn't interfere with
us except for the usual gibbering. I counted almost
four hundred armed bastards."
  "Tair@o Anjo trying to harass us, scare
us?"
  "Probably." Pallidar coughed, took
another gulp of the medicine. "This is dreadful,
I feel worse already. Ugh! I'm recommending
we withdraw all personnel from here for a while."
  Hoag whistled. "We wouldn't want to close
the clinic."
  "I wouldn't want to have you dead without a coffin.
These bastards love surprise attacks. Like
poor bloody Malcolm. Someone's going to pay
for him."
  Hoag nodded, "I agree." Idly he was
looking out towards Yokohama, the countryside
flat and uninteresting in winter--hate the cold,
always have always will. His eyes took him to Prancing
Cloud, the steamer mail ship, the merchantmen,
warships and tenders all busy, preparing for the coming
storm or preparing to leave. Warships had smoke
trickling from their funnels--fleet orders,
well publicized, so that the Bakufu and their
spies would be aware that the whole fleet could sail
on a war footing within an hour.
  Stupid, all the killing, but then what can we
do? Those responsible must pay. Then he saw the
smoke from the Struan steam cutter chugging this way,
bobbing through the troughs, spray from the bow wave
drenching the glass of the bridge and main cabin. His
anxiety crested.
  "Settry, don't you think--" He aborted
another fervent plea, suddenly realizing that even
if tonight was out for the actual burial, with luck he
could still keep the first part of the plan and have the wrong
coffin put aboard Prancing Cloud.
  I'm the only one who knows which coffin is which,
except perhaps the Sergeant and I've a hunch he
won't notice the difference. No one can, unless
a coffin is opened. "Don't you think life in
Yokohama is weirder than other places,
living on a powder keg as we do?"
  "It's the same everywhere. Just the same,"
Pallidar said thoughtfully, watching him.

              YOKOHAMA

  Jamie, Angelique and Skye were grouped
around the bay window in the tai-pan's office.
Rain splattered the glass. It was near midday.
"Tonight will be too dangerous."
  "Then it will storm, Jamie?"
  "Yes, Angelique. Enough to stop us."
  "Will Cloud sail tonight as planned?"
  "Yes, no storm will stop her. The cutter's
gone to Kanagawa to collect the other coffin. You
still want it put aboard her and not the mail ship?"
  "That's Sir William's order, not mine,"
she said firmly. "He wants to send my husband
against his wishes and mine, he says it should go as
quickly as possible and that's by clipper. A coffin will
go as he wishes. Jamie, our ruse, I think
our ruse is fair. As to the storm, it will be a
little storm. If we can't bury my husband tonight,
then we'll try tomorrow. Or the next day."
  "The mail ship will sail tomorrow around noon."
  "Could you delay her, in case?"
  "I think so. I'll try." Jamie thought a
moment. "I'll talk to the captain. What
else?"
  Angelique smiled, sadly. "First we have
to see if Dr. Hoag was successful. If not
... perhaps I must go with the clipper after all."
  "More than likely Hoag will come back with the
cutter, then we can decide." Jamie added, not
believing it, "Somehow it'll all work out. Don't
worry."
  "What about asking Edward Gornt to join us?"
she asked.
  "No," Jamie said. "The three of us are enough
with Hoag. I've arranged berths on the
mailship, for Hoag, you and I."
  Skye said, "Angelique, it's much wiser for
you to stay here. Everyone here knows Wee Willie
made the decision against your wishes, and that takes
some of the heat from you."
  "If we cannot bury Malcolm, then I will go.
I must be at his funeral, have to." She sighed.
"We should have a captain for our venture.
Jamie, it should be you."
  "I agree," Skye said. "Meanwhile, we
wait for Hoag."
  Jamie began to speak, stopped, then nodded and
went to his own office. A big pile
of mail waited for action. He began to deal with
it, working diligently but his concentration was disturbed
by his drawer. In it was Maureen's letter. At
length he threw down his pen and took the letter out and
re-read it. There was no need for he had read it
twenty times before.
  The key sentence was: As there has been no
reply to my fervent requests and prayers that you
return and take up a normal life at
home, I have decided put my trust in our
Maker and venture to Hong Kong, or the
Japans, wherever you are. My beloved father has
advanced us the money which he borrowed against a
mortgage on our home in Glasgow--please
leave word for me with Cook's in Hong Kong for
I sail tomorrow, a second-class berth, on the
Cunard Eastern Mail ...
  The letter was dated over two and a half months
ago.
  He groaned. She'll be in Hong Kong any
day. My letter arrived too late. Now what do
I do? Grin? Hide? Flee to Macao like old
Aristotle Quance? Not on your life. It's my
life and there's no way I can support a
wife, want a wife ... I can't just write the
same letter again and have it meet her there. I'll have
to--
  A knock interrupted his thoughts. "Yes?" he
bellowed.
  Tentatively Vargas poked his head around the
door. "Can I see you a moment, senhor?"
  "Yes, what is it?" Jamie asked.
  Vargas said distastefully, "There's a man here
to see you, a Mr. Corniman--some name like that I
think he said."
  The name meant nothing to Jamie. Vargas opened
the door a crack. The short, ferret-like man was
strangely dressed, part in European clothes,
part Japanese. Shirt, trousers and thick
padded overcoat, clean-shaven, hair clean and
tied in a queue, a knife at his belt and
well-worn boots. Jamie did not
recognize him but here strangers were often not what
they seemed. On an impulse he said, "Come
in, please sit down." Then he remembered the
mail ship. "Vargas, ask Captain Biddy
to stop by a moment will you. He should be in the Club.
Sit down, Mr. Corrniman, is it?"
  "You's grog, mate?"
  "Who are you and what do you want?"
  "Johnny Cornishman, remember I seed
you wiv' the tai-pan, me and my mate, Charlie
Yank, we's prospectors, right?"
  "Prospectors? Oh yes, I remember
you." Now the man was clean and tidy where before he
had been a hairy, filthy, foul-smelling
beachcomber. His malevolent, furtive little
eyes had not changed. "We made you a deal but you
went with Brock's," he said sharply, "you sold
us out."
  "Ay, that we did. We's biznessmen.
Norbert give us'n more brass, didn't he?
Forget him, he's dead. First, some grog, eh?
Then talks."
  Jamie kept his interest hidden. A man like this
did not come without pay dirt. He unlocked his
sideboard and poured half a tumbler of rum.
"You've made a strike?"
  The little man quaffed half the glass, choked and
bared his gums, toothless but for two twisted brown
teeth. "Grog's better'n sak`e, by God, but
never mind, the little sheilas is making up for this'
lack o' grog." He belched and grinned. "Just
so long as you barf. Jesus they's pekulier about
water and barfing, more'n in our Yoshiwara, but
when you's barfed then they's waggles theys bums
till Kingdom come!" He roared at his own
joke, then said toughly, "We's got best
quality steamer coal, tons, mate, 'nuff
to coal our whole effing fleet. At half Hong
Kong price, this' ton."
  "Where? Delivered where?" Jamie said,
brightening. Steamer coal was extremely valuable and
in short supply, especially for the fleet, and a
local supplier would be a godsend as well as a
constant source of revenue. At even twice
Hong Kong price he could sell all he could
get, let alone half. "Delivered where?"
  "'ere in Yokopoko, for Christ's sake, but
sixpence a ton you's puts in't bank for
Johnny Cornishman." He gulped the rum
down. "You's to pay in gold or silver Mex
an' you's pay this bugger." He handed over a
piece of paper. The bad printing read:
Yokohama Village, Shoya Ryoshi,
Gyokoyama merchant. "This sod know wot's
wot, the ropes, knows wot to do. You's knows the
bugger?"
  "Yes, he's the village headman."
  "Good. Me Guv sayed you'd know
him."
  "Who's your Guv?"
  Cornishman grinned. "Lord 'igh Muck
hiself. You's doan' need names. Doan'
waste time. We's a deal, yes or no?"
  After a moment Jamie said, "Where's the seam?"
  "Me strike's me own, mate, not yorn."
The little man laughed nastily. "It be close but
in enemy lands. Listen, me first seam's open,
wiv a mountain of coal nearby an' a thousand of the
yeller buggers to dig'n carry, 'nuff for twenty
fleet for twenty year, by God."
  "Why me? Why ask me to deal with you?"
  "'cause Norbert's bloody dead an'
you's bloody kingpin now the tai-pan's dead.
Yokopoko's proper bloody dangerous, eh?"
Cornishman held out the glass. "I's enjoy
more grog, if you please, Mister godalmighty
Struan's."
  Again Jamie poured and sat down again.
Cornishman noticed half the last measure and
grunted. "Wot's this?"
  "We'll pay a fifth of Hong Kong
price, less customs, delivered here, first
delivery in thirty days. No side deal."
  The little man's eyes darted around the room like a
rat's. "Any customs you's pay, mate.
Me side deal stays. Tell you wot: day after
tomorrer you's send a coaling barge near
Yedo, where I says. Day after termorrer. We
fills her up, you's to pay a fifth when full
and brings her here to Yoko, you pays that geezer the
rest, this' one of the paper. Sixpence a ton in
bank in me name, Johnny Cornishman. Can't
be fairer, eh? You get coal before you pay an'
at half price Hong Kong."
  "A fifth of Hong Kong price overall."
  The little man's face twisted with anger. "At
harf Hong Kong price you's making a big
profit, for Christ's sake, the coal's here, not
in effing Honkers. You's saves shipping,
'surance, and Christ knows what--we ain't
chicken-shit bushwhackers, this's spectible
trade!"
  Jamie laughed. "Tell you what: first barge
I'll pay a third Hong Kong price. If
the quality's what you say and you guarantee
delivery a barge a week or whatever you can do,
I'll up it over the year to half Hong Kong
less fifteen percent. Threepence a
ton on the side to you. What about your partner, what
was his name, Charlie Yank?"
  "Sixpence or nuffink." Again the glance darted
around the room and came back to rest on him,
glittering. "He's dead like yor tai-pan but he
didn't die like that lucky bugger."
  "You'd better watch your tongue about our
tai-pan."
  "Go stuff yourself, mate. That were no
disrespekt, we's all like to meet old Boney
with a doxy chomping on our dingle." He finished his
drink and got up. "Two days, at high noon.
Pick up be here." He offered a small
hand-drawn map. The X was on the coast a few
miles north of Kanagawa, south of Yedo
proper. "You's brings tenders, we gives
labor."
  "Can't do two days, that's a Sunday. Make
it Monday."
  "'course, Lord's day's the Lord's day.
Three day."
  Jamie studied the map. An unprotected
coal barge, with tenders and crew might be a
tempting bushwhack. "As the barge would be naval,
and the coal for the Navy, I imagine they'll send
a frigate to stand offshore."
  "They's can send the whole effing fleet for all
I cares." Cornishman tried to be
dignified. "I's made a bonzer strike an'
we's proper, by God, very proper."
  "I'm glad to hear it."
  "It be sixpence a ton or nuffink!"
  "Fourpence."
  Cornishman spat. "Sixpence, by God,
I's knows worth of coal, and worth to effing
fleet, an' wot you's can make off 'em.
Maybe I's deal direct."
  "You could try," Jamie said gambling.
"Tell you what, fourpence first ten barges, rest
sixpence."
  The little man glowered at him. "Now I's knows
why you's Noble bloody House." He stuck out
his hand, rough and horny. "Yor word as Struan's
gent." They shook. Then he said, "Oh yus,
you's any mercury?"
  Jamie's attention soared back. Mercury
would be used in the extraction of gold. "Yes.
How much do you need?"
  "Not a lot for starters. You's put it on the
tab?"
  "All right. You're staying at the Yokohama
Arms?"
  "Not effing likely--no Drunk Town for
me," Cornishman said with a sneer. "I's on
me way back right smartly, an' you's to keep
supply secret, deal secret, no names no
pack drill--I's wanting no bleeding
bushwhackers jumping me claim." He started
to leave.
  "Wait! Where are you going? How do I contact
you?"
  "I's going back to me claim, mate." Again
he bared his gums in his evil smile. "Me
samurais and me palanquin's outside this'
North Gate, I snuck in private like.
Next time I's come back, I's come back as
gent, no effing Drunk Town no more. An'
you's doan' contact me no more, you go's to the
geezer. I's 'spektible trader now and doan'
you's forget it. Put mercury on't barge."
He walked out.
  For a long time Jamie stared at the walls,
sifting what had been said. A reliable coal
supply would be wonderful but bound to vanish when the
fleet flattened Yedo. And why mercury? Has
that rotten bugger hit real pay dirt? And who's
the real boss? Come to think of it, who's mine?
  Tess until the end of the month. How much
loyalty do I owe her? All of it. Till the
end of the month.
  Rain battered the window. He got up and
looked around the bay critically. The sea was a
dirtier grey than before, the sky lowering. No
doubt the storm would be bad for the cutter but not for a
ship. Ah, there she is!
  Their cutter was a couple of hundred yards or
so off their wharf, making way carefully against the
waves, shipping some water but not badly, spray
from the bow wave substantial, the Struan flag
at half mast--as the flag above their building had
been since the death of the tai-pan. His binoculars
were on the window ledge. Now he could see Hoag
and Pallidar clearly in the cabin, the
flag-draped coffin lashed securely to one of the
benches as he had ordered. A twinge went through him
seeing the entwined Lion and Dragon around
Malcolm's coffin--a sight he had never
expected to see. Then he remembered that it was not
his friend's coffin but some unknown native, at least
he hoped so.
  "Vargas!"
  "Yes senhor."
  "Take this lot of mail, copy it and seal
it--I'll deal with the rest this afternoon. I'll be
back later."
  "Captain Biddy wasn't in the Club but
expected, senhor, I left a message."
  "Thanks." Unhurried he put on his coat
and hat and went out, leant against the rain-filled
wind. He was almost alone on the High Street.
At the North Gate, Cornishman was nowhere
to be seen. A few samurai guards huddled in
the lee of their Customs House. Some traders were
scuttling for the Club and a late tiffin. A few
waved. One of them stopped and urinated in the
gutter. South Drunk Town seemed even more
squalid under the overcast. This's no place
for a woman, he thought.
  "Ahoy, Jamie!" Hoag called from the
cutter.
  "Hello Doc, hello Settry." They
clambered onto the rough, tarred planks, the
piling timbers sunk deep in the seabed creaking
with the thrust of the waves. One look at Hoag was
enough to know that the switch had been successful, however
much the squat man pretended nonchalance. So
we're committed, he thought. Pallidar was having
a coughing fit. "Settry, you'd better get that
fixed before it turns into something worse."
  "It already has," Pallidar said sourly. "This
so-called doctor gave me a potion that's bound
to kill me. Doc," he said coughing again, "if it
does, when it does, the hell with you."
  Hoag laughed. "A double-strength toddy and
you'll be right as rain tomorrow. Jamie, everything's
all right?"
  "Yes."
  Pallidar said, "I'm turning
responsibility of the coffin over to you, Jamie.
It goes aboard Cloud at once?"
  "About half an hour. Angelique wanted
to ... to say good-bye. Reverend Tweet will
add a few words."
  "Then she's definitely not going by the
clipper?"
  "I don't know, Settry, not positively.
Last I heard she was going by the mail ship, but,
you know how women are."
  "Don't blame her. Going back aboard the
clipper would give me the creeps
too." Pallidar blew his nose and huddled
deeper into his greatcoat. "If you want I'll
get Sir William to send the coffin by mail
ship then they'd arrive together."
  "No," Hoag said, too quickly for Jamie,
then recovered, "no, Settry old boy, I
wouldn't recommend that, medically. Best leave
arrangements as they are, coffin by Prancing
Cloud. Angelique's all right now but a
sudden shock could shove her back into a nightmare.
Better she goes by mail ship and the coffin
by clipper."
  "Just as you want. Jamie, I'm recommending
to William we shut down Kanagawa at
once, that's why I came back."
  "Christ Almighty, why?"
  Pallidar told him about the patrols and
numerous samurai around. "Not to worry. We can
blow 'em all to hell. Mind if I have the
cutter take me back, it'd save me time."
  "Why not go with her to Prancing Cloud, and she
can take you direct after that. Are you overnighting
at Kanagawa?"
  "No, I've seen enough and just have to get my
lads," Pallidar said to their relief. "The
clerks and guards can evacuate over the next
few days. See you later." He walked off,
coughing.
  Before he was hardly out of hearing distance Hoag
said, "It went perfectly, Jamie."
  "Not now for Christ's sake." In spite of the
cold and wet Jamie was sweating. He led the
way back to the High Street to the lee of a
bungalow, safe from other ears. "What
happened?"
  "It worked like a charm. This morning as soon as the
cutter arrived we went to the morgue an--"
  "Who's we?"
  "Settry, Sergeant Towery, the Bosun and
two crew. We draped and secured the flag to the
coffin and they put it aboard the cutter. The other
one is waiting for us tonight or whenever--supposedly
waiting for cremation." Hoag peered seawards,
against the rain. "No chance tonight, eh?"
  "No. But it'll blow itself out by morning. I
think."
  "Good." Hoag rubbed his hands against the cold.
"Everything worked like a dream. One small problem,
the native was tiny, just skin and bones so I
packed his coffin with earth to make up the
difference in their weights."
  "God Almighty, of course! I'd forgotten
about that. That was clever."
  "Did that last night, no trouble--no one said
a thing when they put the coffin aboard the cutter, not
a sausage."
  "My God, this is all so dicey," Jamie
said uneasily. "How are we going to get the other
coffin out of the Legation with the clerks and soldiers
there?"
  "Already taken care of that." Hoag chortled.
"I told our Japanese assistants to put it
in the shed by our Kanagawa jetty, it's not far from
the crematorium. They can do it without arousing any
suspicion. George told me he puts
coffins and bodies there when he has an
overload. It's routine."
  "Marvelous! How far is it from the jetty?"
  "Fifty yards or so. Three of us can carry
it easily and we'll have the Bosun, won't
we?"
  "Yes. You've done damn well. Damn
well." Jamie squinted into the rain. "Pity we
couldn't do it tonight and finish it."
  "Never mind. Tomorrow will be fine." Hoag was very
confident and pleased with Jamie's praise. No
need to tell about being spotted and about Pallidar.
This morning they had had breakfast together and when he
said: "Settry, about last night ..."
Pallidar had interrupted him: "Forget it, just
forget it, Doctor, that's the best thing for you
to do."
  That is best, he thought, beaming, forget it ever
happened. "Shall we fetch Angelique? How is
she?"

  Within the hour they had reassembled beside the
cutter. The rain was heavier and the wind squalling.
Spray came over part of the jetty. The cutter,
well moored, dipped and fell with the waves,
ropes creaking. Angelique wore black, a
black cloak raincoat over her dyed black
dress, black hat with a heavy black veil, and
an umbrella. The umbrella was sky blue, a
startling contrast.
  Surrounding her were Jamie, Skye,
Dmitri, Tyrer, Sir William and other
Ministers, Captain Strongbow, Gornt,
Marlowe, Pallidar, Vargas, Andr`e,
Seratard, the Reverend Tweet and many
others, all bundled against the rain. In the
background Father Leo stood bleakly, hands in his
sleeves, peering out from under his cowl. Jamie had
invited Tweet to say a blessing: "It would be
odd if we didn't, Angelique. I'll
make sure there's no real service, or
speeches, that wouldn't be correct, just a
blessing."
  The inclement weather helped to make the blessing
brief. For once, Tweet was curiously
eloquent. When he finished, self-consciously
they all looked at her. Overhead gulls cawed
as the wind swirled them past, riding the currents
joyously. Sir William said, "Again,
Madame, my deepest condolences."
  "Thank you." She stood straight, rain
spattering off her umbrella. "I protest that
I am not allowed to bury my husband openly as
he and I wish."
  "Your protest is noted, Madame." Sir
William raised his hat. The rest filed past,
saying their condolences and raising their hats or
saluting if in uniform. Strongbow saluted and
stepped into the cutter, Pallidar boarded after him
as Marlowe stopped in front of her, still upset.
"I'm so terribly sorry," he said, saluting,
and walked off.
  Father Leo was last. Somberly he made the
sign of the cross, saying the Latin words, his
face mostly hidden.
  "But he's not Catholic, Father," she said
gently.
  "I think he was one of us, senhora, in his
heart." Father Leo's accent was thickened with
grief, his night spent in prayer, asking what
should he do, should he attend or not. "He would have
seen the Light, you would have helped him, I'm
sure of it. In nomine Patri ..."
  Unhappily he ambled away. Now only
Jamie, Hoag and Skye stood with her on the
jetty. "What now, Jamie?" she asked, a
deep melancholy swooping over her.
  "We wait a minute," he said.
  Like the others he was feeling that he was part of a
cheat, at the same time deeply moved and not a
cheat. This is just to help a friend, he told himself.
You promised to guard his tail, and hers. That's
what you're doing. Yes but it's cheating and I
hate it. Forget that, you're their leader, act like
one. "Captain Strongbow, cast off!
God speed!"
  "Aye aye sir, thank you." The cutter
eased away, dipping in the troughs, then picked
up speed. Sea gulls mewed in her wake.
They watched her go.
  "It feels so odd," she murmured, weeping
silently. "It is, and it isn't. We're not
wrong are we? Are we?"
  Again Jamie made the decision for all of them.
"No," he said and took her arm and walked her
home.

  Just before sunset, Vargas knocked on the
tai-pan's office door. "Mr. Gornt
to see you, senhora. Monsieur Andr`e left a
message that Monsieur Seratard would be
honored if you would dine with him."
  "Thank them but say no, perhaps tomorrow, perhaps.
Hello, Edward. Come in." Again she sat in
an easy chair by the windows, the day dark and
rainy. A white wine was opened and waiting in
ice. One fine glass was upended in the ice and
chilling. "Please help yourself, you're boarding
now?"
  "Yes, the tender's ready. Your health,
Ma'am."
  "And yours. Are you the only passenger?"
  "I don't know." He hesitated. "You
look wonderful, ethereal, and unobtainable,
Ma'am."
  "I will be sorry to see you go. Perhaps everything will
be better when you return," she said, liking him as
before. "Will you come back or first go to Shanghai?"
  "I'll know better in Hong Kong. Where will you
be staying? On the Peak in the Struan Great
House?"
  "I've not decided--finally--even if I'll
go."
  "But ... you won't be at the funeral?" he
asked, confused.
  "I'll decide tomorrow," she said, wanting
to keep him off balance, him and everyone, even
Jamie. "Mr. Skye strongly advises me
to stay here, and I don't feel well." She
shrugged. "I'll decide tomorrow, I've a berth
reserved. I desperately wish to be with him, I
need to be there, and yet, if he's not buried as
he wishes and I wish, then ... then I've
failed."
  "You haven't failed him, Ma'am.
Everyone knows that."
  "You won't fail me, will you, Edward? You'll
deliver my letter to her, everything, as we discussed?"
  "At once. A promise is a promise.
A matter of honor. Ma'am." He looked
at her directly.
  "And I promised too. Didn't I? A
matter of honor. Eternal friendship."
  The way she said the two words was a promise and
not a promise. For the life of him he could not read
her as he had before. Earlier he would have known how
far that promise would take him. Now there was a
barrier. I'm glad, he thought, for if there's a
barrier for me it will exist for every man. Six
months is still not much to wait and a perfect time.
  So she may not be in Hong Kong. How does
that affect me? "My plans, Ma'am? They
depend on Tess Struan." He wanted
to tell Angelique his real plan, but was far
too shrewd to indicate that, even obliquely.
"I'm hoping she'll act on the information I'll
give her. That will take a month, at least. If
she wishes I'll wait the month and help,
she'll need help, Ma'am. It all depends
on her. If you arrive by mail ship we can talk
more there. If not, may I write?"
  "Of course, yes please. I would like that. By every
mail. I promise I will keep you advised of
my plans." She opened the drawer and took out
an envelope. It was addressed to Mrs. Tess
Struan. And unsealed. "You may read it."
  "Thank you, Ma'am, but that's not necessary."
  Angelique took it back, did not seal it
but just tucked the flap into the back. "This will save
you the trouble of steaming the flap open, Edward."
  He laughed. "What makes you so sure I'd
do that?"
  "I would. It would be too much of a temptation.
But please seal it before you give it to her."
  He nodded. "You once said, now you knew why
your husband liked me, why I would be a dangerous
enemy, an even more dangerous friend. Perhaps that
applies to you, Angelique."
  "Perhaps it does," she said simply. "I'm
feeling my way in this new world, Edward. It's
fraught with difficulties, and the quicksands. But you will
find me very dependable once I've given my
word, as I have. Do not forget I am French." A
little smile. "Read it."
  The letter read:

Dear Mrs. Struan, by now you will have heard the
terrible news about Malcolm--sorry that I cannot
tell you in person but I have been advised by Dr.
Hoag not to travel by Prancing Cloud or the
mail ship.
  I cannot tell you how distraught I am and have
been. Let me just say simply I loved him with
all my heart and tried to do the best I could while
he was alive, and, too, after his death have been
desperately trying to bury him as he wished, at
sea, like his adored grandfather. But that was forbidden me.
Please, I beg you, please do for him what I
failed to do.
  But I have not failed him in a further duty.
The bearer of this letter was your son's friend. He brings
information of great importance--that he had promised
to give Malcolm the day he died, that he,
Malcolm, was rushing to give you by Prancing
Cloud: the means to destroy your everlasting
enemies, Tyler and Morgan Brock. Mr.
Gornt has sworn to me he will give every last
detail to you. I beg you to implement it if it is
what he purports it to be. The successful
conclusion to that feud, and the elimination of that agony from
your head is, I know only too well, all the
epitaph Malcolm would wish.

  She had dated it, and signed it Angelique
Struan, Yokohama. There was a P.s.:
Strange, isn't it, we who have so much in
common--I hate my father too, he tried
to destroy me too--have been so far apart, so
unnecessarily.
  Edward Gornt sealed the envelope thoughtfully.
He put it in his pocket and raised his glass.
"A long life, you're a remarkable woman,
remarkable."
  "How so?"
  "You ask for nothing, give everything," he said with
genuine admiration, and did not add, And you do not
mention thirty days when, as women, that will be
uppermost in both your minds--for if you are carrying
his child, the Struan empire is mostly yours whether
daughter or son, though a son would be perfect!
And even if you're not, an immodest claim on
Struan's is just as perfect and unassailable.
In either case you will still marry me! "You are a great
woman," he said calmly, "I hope I may
be allowed to share an everlasting friendship."
  He got up, gallantly kissed her hand and
did not linger.
  Alone again she nodded to herself, content, then poured
wine into his glass--there were other glasses within
easy reach but she chose his deliberately and
sipped with added enjoyment. Then grimly raised the
glass seawards: "God speed, Prancing
Cloud." Another sip. And she smiled.

  "Phillip!"
  "Yes Sir William?"
  "Here, take these. Are the rest of our
dispatches ready?"
  "Yes sir. I've done extra copies of
both the Inquests, the death certificates,
etceteras. I'll get your "private and
confidential" to the Governor from the safe and that's
the lot. Best if I take them aboard Cloud
personally."
  "Yes, that's wise. I've one more. Give
me a couple of minutes." Weary from all the
writing and the stress of the last few days, and grinding
awareness of how exposed Yokohama was, Sir
William shook off his headache, thought a moment,
made sure the nib was clean, chose his most
official letterhead and wrote firmly:

Dear Mrs. Struan. I'm sending this
by special dispatch via Prancing Cloud for
special reasons, both formal and personal.
  First I would like to offer my deepest condolences
on the unhappy demise of your son whom I
numbered amongst my friends as well as
colleagues. Second, the circumstances and
facts of his marriage and death were established under
oath in an official Inquest, a copy of whose
findings are enclosed.
  To the best of my belief the shipboard
marriage is legal--I have asked the
Solicitor General for a formal ruling.
  To the best of my belief Mrs.
Angelique Struan had nothing whatsoever to do
with the death of her husband, and was in no way
responsible--a fact supported by medical
evidence of Doctors Hoag and Babcott (and
part of the Inquest documents) that you will no doubt
receive in person.
  To the best of my belief your son died as a
result of wounds suffered during the unwarranted
attack on the Tokaid@o and was, in
effect, murdered then. The King, or daimyo,
who ordered these attacks has not yet been brought
to justice. I assure you he will be.
  To the best of my belief, and personal
observation, your son was in love with
Mademoiselle Richaud to the point of
obsession, and pursued her for marriage in every way
he could conceive. She reciprocated his affections in
exemplary, ladylike fashion. She is a
brave young woman and anything to the contrary are
lies spread by scoundrels.
  Lastly, to the best of my belief, your son
wanted to be buried at sea like his grandfather. His
...

  Sir William hesitated a moment, continuing
to be careful in his choice of words. He formulated
his thought, then continued with his firm strong hand: His
widow pleaded strongly that this should be done, here,
wanting to grant him his wish (we have found no will
yet, nor a formal letter to that effect) but it is my
belief that this was what he wanted. I overruled his
widow's request and decided his remains should be
sent to Hong Kong to you. Again he hesitated as
variations presented themselves, then wrote, I
strongly recommend this request be granted. I
am, Madam, your obedient servant.
  For a moment he reflected, then went to his
sideboard and poured a brandy, drank, and sat
down again. Now he read the letter carefully.
Twice.
  He made a couple of edits and changes and
rewrote the letter, signing it Her Britannic
Majesty's Minister to the Japans. Again he
reread it. Now he was satisfied. The key
changes were: after She is a brave young
woman he had cut out and anything to the contrary
are lies spread by scoundrels as inviting the question
"what lies?"' adding, in its place, and I
commend her strongly to your benevolence. After
buried at sea he eliminated like .his
grandfather, not knowing the truth of that claim.
  "Much better," he said aloud. "Takes the
sting out of it." Rather like that, I commend her to your
benevolence, he thought, though what those two will
finally do to each other only God knows. A week
ago I would have wagered it was no contest but now
I'm not so sure.
  Thankfully he opened his desk diary and added
the name Tess Struan to today's long
list of letters sent by Prancing Cloud. An
entry on Tuesday, 9th, leapt at him:
"Malcolm Struan married Angelique
Richaud aboard Pearl with Ketterer's
connivance." It was written in Russian as was the
whole diary--a lifetime habit insisted on
by his Russian mother--both to keep it private
from most eyes, and also to maintain his fluency. That
reminded him. His fingers opened his new, 1863
diary and he put a question mark on January
11th, adding a note: January 11th We
should know about now if A is carrying or not.
Malcolm's child would simplify her life
considerably, he thought gravely.
  He had decided to do what he could for
Angelique because of her dignity yesterday, and at
the wharf today, because of the pleasure she had given him
with all the dancing and laughter and the lightness she had
brought to Yokohama, and because she was French, with
all the latent panache that Frenchwomen had above
all others.
  He smiled. Indeed, Angelique, you're
French. And we're British, and no fools--and
that is why we rule the earth and the French don't.
"Phillip!"

  Seratard and Andr`e were at the window.
Prancing Cloud let go fores'les,
tops'les and topgallants and royals and now,
with full sail and the wind aft, she raced into the
deep. Many others were watching too, envying her,
jealous of her, wanting to sail or to own or
to captain such a craft. Many wondered about her
cargo, about the Angel who would leave tomorrow and what
life here would be like without her, and about the fate of the
letters aboard.
  Andr`e said, "Will Ambassador de Geroire
agree, Henri?"
  "Yes. He owes me many favors, our
mission here becomes more effective every day, and the
private visit you've promised with Yoshi, that
I've promised him, is arranged. Isn't
it?"
  "I am assured so," Andr`e said, his throat
abruptly dry. Raiko had sworn that he could
count on it, that the secret battle plans he
had passed over to her were already in the heads of
trusted go-betweens in Yedo for negotiation and
rewards. "First Yoshi has to arrive back,
Henri, then we can make a date.
I'm promised he'll come aboard the flagship.
I've a meeting tonight, and the down payment will fix
it."
  "I've changed my mind about advancing the
money. It's best to ..." Seratard raised his
voice as Andr`e started to protest, "it's best
to wait. I've decided it's best to wait!"
He went and sat at his desk and motioned Andr`e
to sit opposite, not angrily but with a smoothness
that invited no opposition. "As soon as I know
for certain he's back you can pay these ... these
go-betweens."
  "But I promised them the money tonight, you
agreed."
  "So explain I don't trust them,"
Seratard said with a deprecating smile. "Let
them prove themselves. I was saying, de Geroire will
make her a Ward of the State, Andr`e, and so
becomes part of State policy, eh?"
  Tonight Andr`e hated Seratard, hated him because
he was dangerous and devious and knew too much,
remembered too much, and was without feeling. At
breakfast this morning Seratard had peered at him.
"What is it, Henri?"'
  "Nothing, there's a spot on your neck that
wasn't there before and wondered if ... How are you,
Andr`e?"'
  This had sent him into a panic to his bedroom
mirror, petrified that the first sign of his disease
had manifested itself. Ever since he had begun with
Hinodeh he had become achingly sensitive to the
slightest mark or twinge or fever. Most
evenings she would undress him in the light, telling
him how much she enjoyed looking at him, touching
him, massaging or caressing, her fingers and hands
always sensuous, but, even so, certain she was seeking
telltale signs. "None yet, not yet,
thank God," he had muttered to his
reflection, wet with relief that the slight
abrasion was only an insect bite.
  "Andr`e," Seratard was saying, "tonight at
dinner, we must make plans with her. I
recommended that, once she's a Ward of the State
she should stay in the Embassy and ..." A knock
interrupted him. "Yes?"
  Vervene opened the door. "A message from
Vargas, Monsieur. Madame Struan
regrets she is not well enough for dinner."
  Seratard snapped, "If she's well enough
to see a coffin off she could certainly
spare us time. Thank you, Vervene." Then
to Andr`e, "We must see her before she leaves."
  "I'll see her first thing in the morning, don't
worry. But there's a rumor she might delay.
Hoag's supposed to have advised against a sea
voyage, for medical reasons, and certainly
Heavenly Skye is openly opposed."
  Seratard's lip curled. "I detest that
man, he's so uncouth, boorish, and quite
revoltingly British."

  Angelique was watching the departure of the
clipper from the tai-pan's suite, upstairs.
A few passersby saw her at the window, then
hurried on wet and chill, wondering what would
happen to her. One of these was Tyrer, ashore after
delivering the dispatches. She looked so lonely
there, so funereal in her black, never black before,
only the colors of springtime. For a moment he
stopped, tempted to see her, to ask if he could
help in any way but decided not to, there was still so
much to do before his rendezvous with Fujiko, a
monthly payment to Raiko for "past services
pending the conclusion of the contract," and then there was his
lesson with Nakama that had had to be postponed
because of all the work for Sir William.
  He groaned at the thought of all those phrases
and words that he still wanted translated, and the new
note to Anjo that Sir William had
deliberately wanted Nakama to translate,
not exactly not trusting him, but to gauge a
Japanese reaction to a short, undiplomatic
Anglo-Saxon harangue. Even worse he was
behind in his journal and had had no time to write his
weekly letter home. It had to catch the mail ship
whatever happened.
  In the last mail his mother had written that his father
was ill:

... nothing serious, dear Phillip, just a
chest flux that Doctor Feld treats with the
usual bleeding and purging. Sorry to say, as
always, it just seems to weaken him even more. Your Father
has always hated Camomile and Leeches. Ugh!
  Doctors! Illness and agony seem
to follow in their wake. Your cousin Charlotte
took to her birthing bed four days ago, as healthy
as ever could be. We had arranged the midwife but
her husband insisted on having the doctor deliver
her and now she has Childbed Fever and
isn't expected to live. The baby boy is
ailing too. So sad, such a nice young lady, not
yet eighteen.
  News from London: The new Underground
Railway, another first in the world, will open in four
or five months! Horse-drawn Trams are
all the rage and the Christmas Season promises
to be the best ever though there are riots in some of the
Factory Towns. Parliament is debating and will
pass a law prohibiting horseless carriages
from going more than 2 miles per hour and they must have
a warning Flagman walking in front of them!
  Measles is Everywhere, many deaths,
Typhoid's not too bad this year. The Times
reports that Cholera is raging again in Wapping
and the dock areas, brought by an India merchantmen.
  Phillip, I do so hope you are keeping
your chest wrapped and wear woolens, woolen
underwear and keep windows closed again the terrible
Fluxes that abound in the night air. Your Father and
I wish you would come back to Sensible England, though
from your letters you seem to be pleased with your
progress in Japan's language. Does the
Penny Post (what a joy!) work for you from the
Japans as well as for us to go there?
  Your father says this Government is Ruining our
country, our morals, and our Glorious
Empire. Did I tell you, now there are more
than eleven thousand miles of railway tract in
Britain. In barely fifteen years
stagecoaches have vanished ...

  The letter went on for pages, enclosing all
kinds of cuttings she felt interesting, and they
were. Wonderful for Phillip, keeping him in
touch with home. But between the lines he read his father's
illness was not an easy one. His anxiety
intensified. For all I know he's already dead he
thought, gravely concerned.
  Standing there on the promenade in the rain, a
tweak of pain came up from his stomach. Sweat
abruptly wet his forehead, perhaps it was the rain,
he didn't know for certain, only that he was sure
he was feverish. Maybe I've really caught
something--the pox or something! Oh my God, perhaps
Babcott's wrong and it's not just the White
Man's Burden--Gippy Tummy or normal
squitters or some such rheum. Oh my God,
even though Andr`e swore by all that's holy,
Raiko too, that Fujiko was as clean
as clean, perhaps she isn't!
  "Oh for goodness' sake, Phillip,"
Babcott had said this morning, "you don't have the
pox, you've just eaten or drunk something bad.
Here, here's some of Dr. Collis's tincture.
That'll cure you by tomorrow and if it doesn't, we'll
give you a good burial, not to worry! For
Christ's sake, how many times do I have to tell
you: drink only boiled water, or tea."
  He mopped his brow, the light fading but no
letup in the wind. Certainly he felt better
than in the night when he had the runs. Wasn't
for Babcott, or Collis's magic, I would
have to have missed the funeral--not the funeral,
Malcolm's sending-off. How bloody awful!
Poor fellow! Poor Angelique! What will
happen now, he asked himself, perturbed, took his
eyes off her and hurried for the Legation.
  Angelique had seen him. When the clipper was
swallowed by the dark she drew the curtains and sat
at the desk. Her journal was open. Three letters
were sealed and ready for the mail ship: to her aunt,
enclosing a sight draft on the Bank of England
for fifty guineas, the second to Colette with a
ten-guineas money order, both of which Jamie had
arranged for her using part of the money Sir
William had allowed her to keep. She had
considered using one of Malcolm's chits that were in
the desk, backdating it, using the chop from the safe
but thought that unwise for the moment. The money for her
aunt was just to help, to Colette to buy the best
medicines against her lying-in time.
  I may or may not be there in time, she thought.
Hope so.
  The last letter was to be delivered by hand. It said:
My dear Admiral Ketterer, I know it was
only through your kindness that we were married. I thank
you from the depths of my heart and swear, whatever
power this poor woman may have in the future, that
I will use it in or out of Struan's to wipe out
all sales of opium and equally dastardly arms
sales to natives as my husband had sworn to do.
Again, with all my heartfelt affection,
Angelique Struan.
  Signing Angelique Struan pleased her very
much. The two names went well together. It was
enjoyable to practice the signature, the swirl
of the S somehow helping her to think.
  My scheme with Edward, where on earth did all
those lovely ideas come from? It's
excellent--if he does it as I want. That
should convince Tess I'm not an enemy. But her
son was her son and I wouldn't forgive, not if he
had been my son, I don't think I would.
  The way ahead's fraught with disaster, so much to go
wrong, can go wrong, Andr`e's still a slavering dog
waiting to be muzzled, or put down--yet, in
truth, so many ways to go right--the correct coffin
is en route, Malcolm's ready and waiting for
tomorrow, I can still go to Hong Kong by mail ship if
I want, I'm sure Edward wants to marry
me and he of all people understands a rich wife is
better than a poor one, I have Malcolm's
blank chits and his chop that no one knows about--and
twenty-eight days to go and not like last time, Blessed
Mother, thanks be to Merciful God--I pray for
his child.
  Ah Malcolm, Malcolm, what a good
life we would have had, you and I, I would have grown
up without all the awfulness, I swear I would have.
  Making an effort she shook off her
melancholy and rang the bell on the desk. The
door opened without a polite knock, any form of
knock. "Missee?"
  "Tai-tai, Ah Soh!" she snapped,
ready for her.
  "Missee-tai-tai?"
  "Send Chen here, chop chop."
  "You eat here, down'stair, Missee? Er,
Missee tai-tai?"
  Angelique sighed at the permutations Ah
Soh could find to avoid calling her tai-tai.
"Listen, you piece of donkey dung," she said
to her sweetly, "I'm stronger than you and soon
I'll be paying the bills and then you will sweat," and
was happy to see the dark eyes in the flat face
cross. As Malcolm had explained, speaking in
correct English directly at Ah Soh, not
pidgin, that the maid could not understand would make her
lose face. Such twisted logic these Chinese,
Angelique thought. "Chen, chop chop!"
  Ah Soh shuffled off sullenly. When Chen
came in she told him she wanted a letter
delivered to the British Embassy. He nodded
without comment. "Chen, Ah Tok sick, not sick,
heya?"
  "Ah Tok sick. Ah Tok gone Hong
Kong." Chen waved a hand seawards. "All
same along Master."
  "Oh!" Angelique was greatly
relieved and wished she had thought of that first.
Several times she had seen her skulking in the
shadows, her black eyes filled with hatred,
saliva dribbling from the corner of her mouth. She
gave him Ketterer's letter. "Go Big House,
now."
  He glanced at the name, pretending to be able
to read the barbarian. "Eat all same this
place, heya?"
  "Tai-tai eat all same this place,
heya? Tai-tai!"
  Chen's eyes flickered. His mouth smiled.
"Tai-tai, eat all same this place, heya?
Tai-tai Missee?"
  "You're a piece of donkey dung too.
Perhaps I'll dismiss you--no that would be too kind.
I'll think about you later." She smiled. "Eat
downstair'. What food have?"
  "Wat you wan' tai-tai Missee,
Missee tai-tai?"
  This made her laugh and she felt better for it.
"Missee tai-tai, tai-tai Missee, all
same good. What food? Your food, Chinese
food," she said suddenly, not knowing why. "All
same you-ah, Chen. China food, Number One
food. Best, heya!"
  Chen gaped at her. This was most unusual. In
the past she would just pick at the dishes the Master
enjoyed to please him, and eat European dishes,
meats and potatoes and pies and bread that he and
all Chinese considered fit only for animals.
"Master's food, heya?" he asked
tentatively.
  "Tai-pan food for Master's tai-tai!"
Imperiously, aping Malcolm, she waved him
away and turned her back.
  Chen, unsettled, and went off mumbling.
"All same tai-pan, hav got, yes
Missee tai-tai."
  I must develop a taste for Chinese food and
knowledge of it, she thought, grasping a new idea. In
case I stay part of the year. Jamie said he
likes Chinese cooking occasionally, Phillip's
enthusiastic and Edward eats it all the time ...
  Ah Edward, Edward-of-so-many-faces, and
possibilities. I'm not sure about him. If
...
  If I bring forth a son I will be so happy that
I've part of Malcolm forever. I'll go back
to Paris for then I'll have plenty of
money, plenty. Tess Struan will be glad to have
me leave and our son will be brought up part French,
part British, and be worthy of his father. If a
daughter, I'll leave too, with less, but there will
be more than enough. Until I meet a title
worthy and a man worthy.
  If I'm unlucky and there's no child, then I
may consider Edward, while negotiating with that
woman for my widow's mite, all this subject
to Heavenly Skye being wrong.
  Wrong about how vindictive and ruthless that
woman is.

                 

    Saturday, 13th December:
  The next day the sea was the same grey, the
sky the same grey but the storm had blown itself out.
Rain had stopped. Angelique, Skye and
Hoag were waiting in the cabin of the cutter, still
moored to the Struan jetty and long overdue
to leave for Kanagawa. Beyond the bay they could see
whitecaps. Gloom, fed by the sharp wet wind,
made waiting harder. Jamie and the Reverend
Tweet were half an hour late.
  "I wish they'd hurry," she said, nervousness
creeping into her resolve. "What's keeping
them?"
  "We won't have to go too far out so we should still be
all right," Skye said queasily, the cutter
heaving gently. The men wore top hats and
sweaters and heavy topcoats--Angelique her
dark green riding clothes and boots as more suitable
for shipboard travel.
  Above the cabin was the small, glassed-in
wheelhouse. Bosun Tinker leant on the sill
of one of the opened windows, puffing a pipe, too
seawise to ask questions. Jamie McFay had
simply said, "Have the cutter at the wharf early
with a full load of coal, just you and a dependable
stoker." That was enough for him. The rest would come soon
enough, like why sensible people wanted to put to sea on a
day when sensible seafarers were best ashore.
  "Look, there he is!" Skye said, and cursed
without noticing he had done so.
  Jamie was alone, hurrying along High
Street towards them. Passersby greeted him,
frowned and went about their business. He jumped
aboard and closed the cabin door. "Tweet's
changed his mind," he said, his chest
heaving like the deck.
  "God damn the fellow, why--he agreed?"
Skye was disgusted. With Jamie they had decided
the best story was to say that a Christian fisherman
had died in Kanagawa and had begged to have a sea
burial, would he officiate, the rest could come
later. There would be a contribution for his trouble.
  "He said not in this weather," Jamie said,
panting from his haste and frustration. "I tried every
way to convince him but he only said, "The
fellow's dead, tomorrow or the next day will be just as
good, weather's dicey, we probably wouldn't be
back before dark--I'd forgotten Lunkchurch's
dinner party. After service tomorrow, or even better
Monday." Rotten bastard!" He took
another breath. "Rotten after he'd agreed."
  Angelique felt sick with disappointment.
"Father Leo! I'll go and ask him. He will do
it."
  "There's no time, not now, Angelique, and
anyway Malcolm wasn't Catholic, that
wouldn't be proper."
  "Damn Tweet," Hoag said, fuming.
"We'll have to postpone. Sea's not the best, perhaps
it's just as well. I suppose we have to try
tomorrow?" They all looked at her.
  Jamie said, "Tweet's not dependable, he
may want to put it off till Monday--either way
there's the problem of the mail ship, she won't
wait beyond noon." He had asked her skipper
to delay but, already behind schedule, the man had said that
was the best he could do.
  Hoag said, "We absolutely should go
aboard, no doubt about that. Angelique should
absolutely be at the Hong Kong funeral."
  "I'm opposed," Heavenly said. "But if she
goes, I'll go."
  "Father Leo," Angelique persisted.
"I'll ask him."
  Jamie said, "It wouldn't be proper. Listen,
there's one solution, Angelique. A sea
burial doesn't require a chaplain, a
ship's captain can do it just as Marlowe marr--"
  Her hope soared. "We'll ask John!
Quick, let's--"
  "Not possible, I've already checked, he's
aboard the flagship and busy with Ketterer."
Jamie continued in a run, "Angelique,
I'm captain of this craft, I've a mariner's
ticket, albeit an old one,
I've seen enough sea burials to know what to do,
I've never done it before but that doesn't matter.
We have witnesses. If you like I can officiate
... it'd be legal." He saw her confusion and
looked at Skye, "Heavenly, legally that's
right? Well isn't it, for God's sake?"
  "It'd be legal." Skye's nervousness
increased as a larger than usual wave slapped
the side of the boat, Hoag also feeling
squeamish.
  Jamie took another deep breath.
"Angelique, this whole idea, the whole
burial is bizarre to say the least, a little more
won't harm Malcolm. I brought a Bible and
Naval Regs, I had to fetch them, that's why
I was late. What do you say?"
  In answer she put her arms around him, the
tears wetting her cheeks. "Let's begin.
Please, Jamie, quickly."
  Jamie McFay held her and found the
closeness pleasing.
  Skye said, "What about the Bosun and stoker?"
  Jamie snapped, "I already told you I'll
deal with them." Gently he loosed himself and slid
the door back. "Bosun," he called out,
"cast off! Head for Kanagawa."
  "Aye aye sorr." Glad that some decision
had been made, Tinker took the craft to sea and
turned northwards for the far shore. Waves made
her bob and weave but not too badly, wind still
well within limits, the sky promising no worse
than before. Humming a sea chanty made him
feel better.
  Soon Jamie joined him. "You head for the
Legation jetty. We're going to take a coffin
aboard ..." He saw the Bosun's bite
harder on his pipe. "A coffin. Then we're
going out to sea a league to deep water and we're
going to bury him. We'll have a ceremony and
you'll be part of it, you and our stoker." Jamie
looked at him. "Any questions?"
  "Me, sorr? No sorr."
  Jamie nodded tautly and went below again. The
others said nothing, watching the coastline and
Kanagawa, dead ahead.
  In the wheelhouse, the Bosun picked up the
metal voice tube, beside the helm, unhooked it
and bellowed to his stoker down in the engine room.
"Get the lead out, Percy!"
                                 
  The warehouse shed was where Hoag had said, within
easy distance of the jetty. The coffin was on a
wooden bench. Skye, Hoag, the Bosun and
stoker each took a corner and lifted it
easily. After they left, Jamie closed the
door, following them. He had thought it best for
Angelique to stay in the cabin. A few fisher
folk and villagers passed by, bowed and hurried
away, not wanting to be anywhere near gai-jin.
  To maneuver the coffin aboard was more difficult.
The rise and fall of the deck, slippery with salt
water, was hazardous. "Wait a sec," the stoker
gasped, "lemme get aboard."
  He was a short man wearing a tattered woolen
skullcap, with heavy shoulders and immense
forearms. Once on the deck he spread his feet
wide and grasped the coffin mid-center and heaved it
aboard and part way into the cabin, almost by himself. The
vein-stretching effort made him fart
involuntarily and loudly. "Pardon all," he
said gruffly, then hauled the box further
to safety. One end was in the cabin the other
projecting aft onto the poop.
  "We'll lash it there," Jamie said.
  "Aye aye sorr."
  "Afternoon, Doctor Hoag." The voice was
dour.
  Startled they all looked around. Sergeant
Towery and another soldier were watching them
balefully.
  "Oh! oh good aft--hello Sergeant,"
Hoag said, his voice strangled. With the others he
stood stock still. Towery came closer and looked
at the coffin. "Well now, what have we 'ere.
Taking the bugger, begging your pardon, Ma'am,
taking the coffin to Yokohama, eh?"
  "We, we, he asked to be buried at sea,
Sergeant," Hoag said. "He, Mr. McFay
kindly loaned his cutter so here we are."
  "At sea, eh?" Sergeant Towery looked
at them, one at a time, as though wanting to etch their
faces on his memory. "Very commendable, I'll be
bound." Another wait while they died a little more.
Then he said, "At sea, eh? Best not waste
time or you'll be feeding fishes too. Ma'am."
Politely he saluted her and marched off, the
soldier falling into step.
  They did not move for a moment. "Christ,"
Hoag muttered.
  "What do you make of that?" Jamie
asked.
  "Trouble, sorr." Shakily, the Bosun
took a swig of rum from his hip flask, passed
it to Jamie who took a swig, Hoag shook his
head, so did Angelique. The stoker was last.
To Tinker's disgust, he swallowed most of it,
belched. "Pardon."
  Jamie's stomach was churning. "Bugger
appeared from nowhere, as though he was waiting for us.
Did you see him walking up?" They all shook
their heads. "We'd best be going."
  While they secured the coffin, the Bosun
conned the cutter out to sea. She rode the waves
well with only spray coming aboard, just enough to be
irritating to those on deck. Below, the cabin was
noisy but snug, the air clean and well
ventilated, keeping out the smell of smoke from the
coal-fired engine. Ahead, eastwards, where the
deep was, the sky appeared meaner--and nothing beyond
between here and America.
  "Best be fast, sorr," Tinker said quietly
to Jamie in the wheelhouse. "We've no more than
an hour or two of light."
  "You sense something, Bosun?"
  "Best be fast, sorr."
  Jamie looked eastwards again. The sky
seemed darker. "I agree. Hold your
course." He turned to go.
  "Sorr, that Sergeant, he's bound to snitch,
right?"
  "Yes."
  "We've to make a funeral, right?"
  "Yes."
  "What's so important about this 'ere?" Tinker
jerked his callused thumb at the coffin, "to risk
all that there?" He pointed at the weather.
  "We're burying the tai-pan, Malcolm
Struan."
  The old man laughed. "His coffin's aboard
Prancing Cloud, sorr, we both knows that."
  "Yes, we both know that. This is, well a
symbolic, a token, a make-believe burial
to conform with his wishes--and his widow's wishes--to be
buried at sea. She doesn't think that will
happen in Hong Kong." Jamie knew the risk
he was taking but there was no other way. So far he
had been able to tell the truth.
  "Make-believe, sorr?"
  "Yes. That's all. There's nothing to hide and
nothing to be afraid of."
  Tinker nodded, unconvinced, and thought, There's
a body inside, must be with all that weight. But,
'nuff said, don't go asking nobs questions you might
not like answered, less you know the better, and let's
hope to Christ the weather stays friendly and not shitty
as she smells. "Thank you, sorr."
  Jamie looked back at the bay that now was far
behind. "Just go out of sight of land, Bosun." A
last look at all compass points, then he went
back to the cabin. "Not long now."
  Angelique leaned closer. "What will that
soldier do?"
  "Report us, bound to. It doesn't
matter."
  "They can't do anything to us, can they, Mr.
Skye?"
  "I really can't forecast what, what Sir
William might or might not do," Skye said,
his stomach sickly conscious of the rise and fall
of the deck.
  Jamie reached into one of the lockers and brought out
the large British flag he had put there, and the
Lion and Dragon. Helped by Hoag, he
secured them both around the coffin. The cutter was
rising and dipping more severely than before and they had
to hold on to steady themselves. Angelique sat
near the open door. The sea air was wet and
cold. She felt the tears beginning so she let the
dark veil fall and pretended to look back at
the land. "Not long now," Jamie said.
  By the time land was just a thread on the horizon, the
light was still fair, the sea heavier, waves
white-flecked, wind stronger, but everything within
limits. No rain. Jamie called out,
"Bosun, slow ahead, just enough to give us way."
  "Idle it is, sorr!"
  Cutting the high-powered thrust of the engines
created a sudden pool of near silence, pleasant
to their spirits, a welcome relief to the grinding
noise and apprehension at being so far out--both
Hoag and Skye increasingly queasy. Only the
whine of the wind now, and lapping sea, the comforting
ticking over of the engine, felt through the decks more
than heard, just enough to keep her bow into wind. The
wind was firm, easterly, from the ocean, stronger
than before. Jamie took a deep breath.
"We'd best begin."
  "Yes. What shall we do?" Angelique
asked.
  "Come on deck, here on the poop,
but hold on. Bosun, lay aft, stoker too."
  "Best I stay here on the conn, with yor
permission, sorr." He bellowed down the voice
pipe, "Percy, lay aft."
  It was colder now. They grouped themselves as best
they could, holding on to steady themselves. Jamie
positioned himself near the stern, the others facing him.
"Hats off," he ordered, removing his own.
Skye, Hoag, the stoker and Bosun Tinker
obeyed. He opened Naval Regs at the marked
appendix.
  Reading, and improvising he said, "We are
gathered here in the sight of God to cast the remains
of our friend Malcolm Struan, husband of
Angelique Struan, tai-pan of the Noble
House, into the deep, granting him the sea
burial he wished and she wished, acting as friends
should act. ..."
  At the mention of the name the stoker's eyes had
widened and he glanced back at the Bosun who
shook his head, cautioning him to keep quiet.
Muttering to himself, hating funerals, he pulled his
jacket closer against the chill of the wind, wanting
to be below in his warm engine room. The wind picked
up a knot. They all felt the change.
Jamie hesitated, then continued, "Now we say
the Lord's Prayer. Our Father ..."
  Each in his own way prayed and said the words, the
increased surge of the deck dominating most of their
minds. When the prayer was finished Jamie
squinted down at the book for a moment, not that he
needed to for he had read the service in the
wheelhouse coming here, needing time to slow his heart and
gather his own thoughts away from the sea. While the
others had had their eyes closed, he had not. With the
Bosun he had seen the approaching squall line
behind them, the waves beneath churning and ugly.
  "As Captain of the Struan cutter
Cloudette," he said a little louder than before
to carry over the wind, "it is my duty and
privilege to commend this man's spirit to the Keeping of
Almighty God, asking Almighty God
to forgive him his sins, not that we knew he had
any, not real sins, casting him into the deep from whence
... from whence we came here from England, from home
across the seas. He was a good fine man.
Malcolm Struan was a good fine man and we
miss him, we miss him now and we'll miss him
in the future ..." He glanced at
Angelique who was holding on to a
gunnel stanchion with both hands, her knuckles
white. A gust hit her, pressing her veil
against her face. "Do you want to say anything,
Ma'am?"
  She shook her head, the silent tears streaming.
Spray came aboard to starboard, slightly lower
in the water because of their weight and that of the coffin.
  Bleakly he motioned to the stoker and Skye.
Awkwardly, their footing precarious, they loosed
the ropes binding the coffin to the bench and eased it
laboriously towards the starboard gunnel
to project out over the sea. With one hand, Jamie
helped them. And when the coffin teetered on the
brink, he said loudly, his own unhappiness
cresting, "Dust will go to dust, and the sea and the sky will
claim its own, and the wild winds will whisper one
to another that this, good fine young man has gone to join
his Maker too soon, too soon ..." With the
other two men, he gave the coffin a last shove
and it tipped over and went into the ocean.
  The cutter heeled, correcting for the loss of
weight, a waiting gust caught the exposed hull
and heeled her more. The port gunnel went into the
sea. They all grabbed for hand holds except the
Bosun and stoker who rode with it. Angelique,
weak from tears, lost her grip and skidded away.
She was almost overboard when Jamie lunged and
caught her, frantically dragged her back,
holding on with his other hand. Wind tore her hat
and veil away and sent them swirling, then the
stoker, with strong sea legs, slid down to her and
lifted her and scrambled back into the safety of the
cabin, tumbling after her.
  Temperature dropped. Rain began. The
squall fell on them. Jamie shouted,
"Bosun, go home!"
  "Best stay below, sorr!" Tinker shouted
back, already decided what to do and how to do it. He
waited until the stoker, mouthing violent
curses, had scuttled to the engine room hatch and
closed it after him and Jamie, Hoag and Skye
were safe in the cabin. Rain became slashing. The
sea violent.
  Tinker signalled "Slow Ahead," swung
the wheel to port and eased off the wind. Her bow
dug into a comber. She broke free bravely,
water cascading along her deck to smash into the
glass of cabin and wheelhouse, and continued
to turn. "Easy now," he said, pipe firm in
his mouth, "we're friends for God's
sake, we just give you old Green-eyed
Devil's grandson."
  Coming around was foul. Waves pushed by the wind
heeled the cutter over, retchingly, and as she
tried to correct herself they allowed almost no
respite and dragged her over further. In the
cabin the four of them hung on as best they could,
anything loose cascading. Again Angelique
lost her balance but the other two held her, for the
moment none of them thinking about much else than the
storm. Hoag had gone dirty grey. With a
bile-filled groan he lay down.
  "It's just the turn," Jamie shouted over the
noise and wind, the boat corkscrewing, and
Angelique buried her head in his shoulder,
frightened. "It'll ease off in a moment." He
saw that the sea was bad but not revolting. Yet.
Added to that he had complete confidence in the Bosun
and craft--so long as the engine continued to provide
power. "Not to worry!"
  Bosun Tinker had decided that, too, and
to scurry for a lee shore, plenty of time, if
need be, to swerve back into wind, put out a
storm anchor--a bucket on the end of a rope
to keep her head firmly into the wind--and ride it
out. "If she'll bloody ride out wot she
weren't never to bloody be in," he said fighting the
wheel against the press of the waves.
  The cutter came around and righted. Her bow
dipped as the following wave went past, pushed
faster by the wind, then the craft climbed
sickeningly, crested and slammed down into the trough.
All aboard winced. Again the same, and again the
crash with plenty of water aboard this time. Down
down down then up up up ever higher then
crashhhhh and foaming water swirled past the
windows, decks awash. Angelique let out a
little moan. Jamie had one arm around her, the other
locked to a handhold. Rain slashed into the stern
windows and door. Over in one corner now Skye
had his head down and was retching, Hoag, prone and
equally helpless.
  Aloft in the wheelhouse the Bosun swayed from
side to side, riding the pitching deck easily.
He had his craft under control. Rain and spray
were heavy on the windows but he could see well enough and
he did not allow the waves to take her
directly stern-on but gave them a little way so that
the up and down did not have the full force of the sea but
muted it, the craft sliding a little--
vile for the passengers but "They're safe, ain't
they?" He beamed, enjoying himself, too many storms
conquered, time enough for fear over three or four hot
toddies ashore in front of a toasty fire in
an hour or two. Happily he resumed his
rollicking chanty.
  Then his heart skipped a beat. "Christ
Almighty!" he burst out. The coffin was
alongside to starboard, still afloat, level in the
water, dipping and climbing with them, the two flags
still around it. From the cabin Jamie had seen it too
and knew, equally shocked, if a big wave
varied course it could easily wash the coffin back
aboard, or worse, use it as a battering ram
against the fragile superstructure, or, worst of
all, punch a hole in their unprotected hull.
  The more Tinker eased away, the closer it
came. Once it bashed against the side, then
swirled off, spinning like a top in a vortex, but
staying parallel and Jamie cursed that he had not
had the foresight to weigh it with an anchor chain--
air or the buoyancy of the wood was keeping it
afloat.
  It was difficult for Jamie to watch it,
holding Angelique as he did. But he was
glad her head was deep in his shoulder greatcoat.
Again he craned around and caught sight of it,
slightly aft and lying flat in the water, now
seeming to him like the ghoulish craft of a sick mind.
The wind or a current turned it and now,
parallel to the waves, it began to tumble but righted
itself and was stable for three or four waves and then
another comber came that overturned it and to his joy
it went under. He breathed again, seeing it had gone
for good, then it surfaced, the next whitecap
surrounded it, lifted it and hurled it directly
at them. Involuntarily he ducked. It did not
come aboard, just smashed broadside against the
hull, sounding as though they had hit a reef.
  Momentarily, Hoag lifted his head. His
brain was reeling in his skull worse than the
boat so he saw nothing and fell back groaning
into his seasick miasma, Angelique too
looked up but Jamie held her close,
caressing her hair to take the fear away, "Just
some flotsam, nothing to worry about ..."
  His eyes were on the coffin, a few yards
away, parallel to them, its lines clean and
deadly, torpedo-like, both flags still intact.
He flinched as a frothing comber
approached but it went by and over it and when the wave
had gone the coffin had vanished.
  Breathlessly he waited, searching the sea.
Nothing. More waiting. Still nothing. The squall
lessened slightly and no longer howled around the
cabin. The waves were still high and bullying but
Tinker was doing a masterly job, using every piece
of seamanship to lessen the threat, the engine
shrieking as the propeller shaft came clear of the
water from time to time. "Come on," Jamie
murmured, "keep going, nice and easy."
  Then his eyes focused. The coffin was fifty
yards away, a little aft, the nose pointed
directly at them. It was keeping station with them,
rising and falling as though attached by some invisible
hawser. Ugly and deadly. He counted six
waves and never a change. Then the seventh
appeared.
  The seventh wave was bigger than the rest. It
took the coffin, made it into a missile and
hurled it at them. Jamie knew the impact
point would be dead center amidships on their
starboard side and their roll would expose the hull
for maximum damage. His breathing stopped.
  Tinker must have seen it too for at the last moment
the cutter veered crazily into its path, dipping
slightly to starboard, the gunnel awash now, and the
violent coffin-missile reared up the wave and
over the prow to tangle itself in the bowsprit
hawsers, hanging there half in, half out of the
water, pulling the craft against the rudder.
  The Bosun was hauling on the wheel with all his
strength but the waves and wind had seized on the
coffin and used it to make the craft unstable. In
minutes the Bosun knew they would founder. There was
nothing he could do to stop it. The voice whistle
shrieked. With difficulty he answered it,
"Yes Percy ..." but he was drowned out by the
stoker's curses and saying what the bleeding hell
was he doing up there so he slammed it back into its
holder, redoubled his effort on the wheel as the bow
was inexorably being forced to disaster.
  Then he saw the cabin door open. Jamie
shoved his way on deck. Hanging on for his
life, he groped forward. At once the Bosun
stuck his head out of the nearest window bellowing and
pointing, "The fire axe, fire axe ..."
  As though in a dream, Jamie heard him and
saw the axe in its red holders on the cabin
roof. The deck was heaving and shivering, the
soul of the boat knowing she was in a death spasm.
One foot skated away from under him but he
collided with the gunnel and found he had the axe in
one hand and was for the moment safe. Water came over
the bow and swallowed him. Again he survived, but in
its wake was a nauseating premonition.
Involuntarily his stomach heaved and the foulness
passed out of him. He lay there in the scuppers,
cold and frightened, his fingers dug into holds, then more
water swamped him. When he could breathe, he
coughed and spat the salt water from his mouth and
nostrils and this helped shock him into action.
  Up ahead the nose of the coffin was held tight
by the mess of hawsers and twisted stanchions, the
bulk of it shoved this way and that as the waves roared
past or sucked at it. He squinted up at the
Bosun against the wind and rain and saw him motion
to hack it away, "... for the love of God watch
out ..."
  No axe will cut that bastard away, he thought
helplessly and hugged a stanchion as a violent
wave came over the side at him, slammed him
against the coffin then sucked him back to the gunnel
again, choking and half drowned. When it subsided
he was astonished to find himself still aboard. Don't
waste time, his brain was shrieking at him, the next
one or the one following will take you and drown you.
  So he left his safe place and went forward
until he was over the coffin, hating it and being here
and that he had allowed himself to be part of this
stupidity, risking her and the others for nothing, but
mostly hating his own fear. The next wave tore
at him but he survived it and hacked down
two-handed with all his strength, slipped and grabbed
the side of the cabin roof as another wave reached for
him, battered him against the coffin's side.
Gasping he fought his way up and hacked again, this
time at the coffin itself, hating the evil thing that it had
become.
  The blade sliced through one of the rope hawsers
but made no impression on the wired ones, a
tangled mess, and buried itself into the beflagged lid
or bottom--he did not know or care which--and
split it. But still the coffin hung there. Using all
his strength he could not move it, shoving and kicking and
cursing, the main length of it dangling overboard and
in the water dragging them, twisting them under the sea.
  Another blow and another and another, using the
head of the axe now as a sledgehammer to batter the
coffin to pieces, raging at it, cursing
it. The wood splintered but held, then a howling
blow crushed the side and top and he slipped and
fell sprawling. The axe skittered out of his
grasp and went overboard and the next deluge
bashed him against the coffin, then pulled him away
again. When the spume had gone and he could breathe he
forced his eyes open. Still the same. Still firm as
ever. Again he groped forward but his strength had gone
and his hands could hardly hold him safe.
  Then he saw a single frayed hawser part. The
mess of wires and ropes screeched under the
tension, twisted and untangled a little, then more, then
the whole coffin slid away tail first and as it
hit the ocean began to break up. For a moment its
head held the surface, then it went under, froth
and bubbles in its wake. A piece of cloth that was
the Struan flag surfaced. The next comber
broomed the sea clean and came aboard and grabbed
his legs from under him, dragged him against the bowsprit
housing, then sucked him back along the deck,
Tinker fighting for control again.
  Astonished to be alive, Jamie found himself
gasping in the stern. At the limit of his strength
he groped for the door and fell into the cabin.
  Skye was still in his corner retching,
half-conscious, Hoag lying on his stomach,
unconscious, Angelique curled up on a
bench where he had left her, hanging on grimly,
moaning and sobbing slightly, her eyes tightly
closed. Shivering, he slumped beside her, chest
heaving, mindless, knowing only that he was still alive and
they were still safe.
  After a while his eyes cleared. He saw land
a mile or so away, and noticed that the rain had
lessened and so had the sea. Now only the
occasional wave came aboard. In a locker below
the seat he found blankets and wrapped one around
himself the other around Angelique.
  "I'm so cold, Jamie, where have you been?"
she sobbed like a frightened child, only half aware.
"I'm so cold, so lonely, and feel awful but so
glad we did it, so glad, oh Jamie, I'm
so cold ..."

  When they came alongside the Struan jetty
a few misted stars were out. It was still early, at the
edge of nightfall. The sky had cleared and
promised a good day tomorrow. Merchantmen and the fleet
lay safe at anchor, quiet, riding lights
on--only the mail ship still being worked
under a multitude of oil lamps like so many
fireflies.
  Nimbly the stoker jumped onto the wharf with a
hawser and tied the craft, then helped the others.
Angelique first, then Skye and Hoag.
Jamie climbed the steps easily, still wrapped
in his blanket, chilled but not badly. Skye and the
doctor were pasty grey, their stomachs and heads
ill at ease, legs weak. Now Angelique
was much better. Her headache had gone. She had
not been sick nor felt seasick. Once again
she had cried herself out. The last half hour she
had been on deck, away from the sick tainted
air below, and had joined Jamie on the poop.
There she faced the salt-sweet wind and let it
wash her brain clean again.
  Behind her Hoag coughed up a wad of phlegm
and spat it into the water lapping the pilings.
"Sorry," he muttered, needing a drink
badly. Then he noticed the mess on the prow,
some timbers crushed, the fore hatch stove in,
bowsprit vanished, halliards gone, most of the
gunnel. "What the hell happened?"
  "Some flotsam was washed aboard, looked like a
crate. Gave me a fright for a moment," Jamie
said.
  "Thought I heard a crash ... I ... think
I'll, think I'll vis't the Club before
turning in."
  "I'll join you," Skye said, needing more than
one drink to settle his stomach. "Jamie?
More'ss Angelique?"
  She shook her head and Jamie said, "Off you
go, nothing more to do tonight. Don't forget the plan."
They had agreed nothing was to be said other than, if
asked, they had conducted a symbolic sea
burial, nothing more.
  Fortunately none of the others had seen the coffin
come aboard or his struggle with it--except
Tinker. As soon as he could, he had gone aloft
to the wheelhouse. "Bosun, about the coffin, the
others below saw nothing, so on your head, by God,
you saw nothing and you say nothing either. It's our
secret."
  "Whatever you say, sorr." Tinker handed him
the flask and touched his forelock, "Thanks.
Weren't for you we'd be below, all of us--along with
him."
  There was barely a swallow left but it helped.
"I thought I'd never make it. We
forget it. Your oath, eh?"'
  "Whatever you say sorr, but afore we forget
it, when the box sank an' broke up an' he
come out it, he didn't half give me a turn,
by God. I thort he were trying to bloody come
back aboard."
  "Jesus Christ," Jamie had gasped.
"You're imagining it, I saw nothing--you're
imagining it."
  "Oh no I weren't, sorr, my eye
line's higher an' yors, right? An' I saw the
bugger, begging your pardon, I saw him come out and
flail for the surface afore he were sucked down."
  "You're imagining things, for Christ's sake.
What an awful thing to say!"
  "It's the God's Truth, sorr, so help
me! 'Course it were only for a moment and sea
spume were all around him but I seed him right
enough!" Tinker had spat to leeward, touched
wood, and made the sign against the Evil Eye
and the Devil, and pulled the lobe of his ear to make
his point. "God's truth, sorr an' strike
me down if I lie, made my balls jump
to Kingdom come. Struck out for the surface he did
afore Davy Jones sucked him down, naked as a
babe."
  "A lot of bloody cobblers!
Nonsense!" Jamie remembered how he had
shivered and touched wood himself just in case.
"You're imagining it, Bosun, though I swear
to God that bloody coffin seemed to have a mind of
its own, an evil one at that."
  "My whole point, sorr, it were possessed
by Old Nick hisself." Again Tinker spat
to leeward, sweating. "Flailed for the surface
he did, different like, eyes open and all, and I
thort he was coming at us for good."
  "For Christ's sake, give over!
Malcolm wouldn't do anything bad to us," he had
said ill at ease. "It was a trick of your
mind."
  "My eye line, sorr, was high--"'
  "Forget your bloody eye line. Have you any
rum left?"'
  Tinker coughed and reached into a hidden locker and
pulled out another flask. It was half empty.
Jamie took a large swallow, choked, and
took another.
  "There'll be ten cases of rum in our
warehouse for you to draw against, Tinker,
with my thanks. You did a fine job, so did the
stoker--four cases for him." Tinker thanked him
effusively. The grand rum heat in his stomach had
swamped all his chill. He looked at the old
weathered face and shrewd blue eyes. "I was
never so bloody scared, never, in my whole
life. I thought I was a goner three or four
times."
  "Not me, sorr," the Bosun said with a grin.
"Not with you aboard, but I was right happy when the
bugger and his box were overboard and him sucked down
cursing us all the way ..."
  Though safe ashore, again Jamie shivered,
thinking of it. Angelique said, "You should get out
of those wet clothes."
  Hoag said, "Well, I'm off."
  She put her arms around him and kissed his cheek
closing her nostrils to the smell of vomit.
"Thank you so much, see you tomorrow." She did the
same to Skye. The two men went off
unsteadily. "Will they be all right?"
  Jamie said, "Nothing that a few whiskies and a
night's sleep won't cure."
  "They're not in shape to discuss anything, are
they?"
  "No. What do you want to discuss?"
  She took his arm in hers and hugged it. "Just
to decide about tomorrow."
  "We can talk as we go." They said good night
to Tinker and the stoker, both men again thanking
McFay for the rum. Then they walked off arm in
arm. "Angelique--before you say anything, I'm
glad we did it."
  "Oh so am I, dear Jamie, you are a dear
and I truly am so glad and so happy nothing
went wrong, no one was hurt." A wan smile.
"Just a little sick."
  "Nothing to worry about. Tomorrow?"
  "I've decided not to go with the mail ship, no,
please don't say anything, I've decided.
I'm safer here. Until I hear from Tess
formally. Really, Jamie, I am, I'm safer
here. And I'm sure Hoag and George would
agree that medically it would be wise. I don't
think you should go either."
  "It's my job to tell Mrs. Struan,
Mrs. Tess Struan."
  "You can call me Angelique, you always have and
I, well, I've only been Mrs. Struan
for a moment." She sighed, continued
walking towards the Struan Building. "It's
better I stay. She'll have to declare herself, better
by letter here. Malcolm's buried and that's all that
I wanted. Do you have to go?"
  "In this wind," he said, thinking aloud,
"Prancing Cloud could make fifteen
to seventeen knots, day in day out, and be tied up
in Hong Kong in five days--she'll have the bit
between her teeth with such important news and
important cargo." They had all agreed that
publicly and now privately they would consider that
coffin the tai-pan's. "The mail ship will
average eight knots if she's lucky so
she'll take the usual ten odd days. By the time
I got there the funeral will have been done, Tess
will know everything from dozens of different points of
view--my report's aboard, so is Sir
William's and fifty others no doubt. She's
dismissed me at the end of month and the new fellow
arrives in a few days and I was told to show him
the ropes." Then there were reasons he decided not
to say aloud: he should be canvassing other hongs--
as the major companies were sometimes called--for a
job. The only real, suitable job available and
up to his experience and surely on offer would be
Brock and Sons. Then he had to decide about
Maureen, and then there was Nemi. He smiled at
Angelique sadly. "It adds up to, no
reason to go, doesn't it?"
  She hugged his arm, oblivious of those passing.
"I'm glad. I won't feel lonely if
you're here."
  "Jamie!" Phillip Tyrer had called out
from the British Legation doorway, hastily
putting on his top coat and hat, hurrying
towards them. "'evening Angelique, Jamie,"
he said in an uneasy rush, "Sir
William's compliments would you two and the, the rest
of the, the passengers and crew of the cutter kindly
see him tomorrow morning before church, before you both board
the mail ship? She sails at two o'clock now."
  "For what purpose, Phillip?" Jamie
said.
  "I, I think he'd like to ... dammit, oh
excuse me, Angelique, obviously he'd like
to ask what on earth you were doing."
  "Doing?"
  The young man sighed. "Sorry, old boy,
it's not my idea. You're on the mat, I've
delivered the message, that's all.
Don't pick on me, I'm just the nearest
dogsbody."
  They both laughed, tension leaving them. "Ten
o'clock?"
  "Thanks, Jamie, that should be plenty of time."
Tyrer looked down the way at the cutter.
"Looks as though you had a rough crossing, what
on earth happened to the prow?"
  Jamie glanced back. The damage was
clearly visible under the lamp at the head of the
jetty, and, he knew, easily observable with
binoculars for miles from the Legation windows.
"Flotsam," he said readily. "A crate,
what looked like a crate was washed aboard, then
carried away again. No great problem."

                 

    Sunday, 14th December:
  "I don't agree, Jamie. We have a
distinct problem." Sir William sat behind his
desk, facing them. Phillip nearby, the mood
in the drab office inquisitorial. "Let's
start again. You seem to be spokesman so I'll
address myself to you. I specifically said no
funeral here, the body was to go back to Hong Kong
an--"
  "It's already gone, Sir William, on
Prancing Cloud," Jamie repeated, his jaw
set. They had been arguing for half an hour, he
and Sir William, the others answering
guardedly, all of them instructed by him and
by Skye, only to respond when questioned directly
and even then not to volunteer anything, just to answer the
question as simply as possible: Hoag, Skye,
Tinker, the stoker, and Angelique. Hoag was
definitely the weakest link in the chain and twice
had almost blurted out the reason. Angelique was
heavily veiled, wearing black and dressed for
church. "We had a make-believe funeral."
  "I know that and as I have asked repeatedly,
repeatedly, if it was merely symbolic why use
a real coffin with a real corpse, albeit with a
native therein, and shove him over the side with a form
of a Christian's burial at sea?"
  Jamie shrugged, stumped by that inevitable question.
This morning Skye had said weakly, "We'd
best shrug it off, brazen it out, keep our heads
down, nothing much he can do but spit blood."
"The coffin was there, I thought it a good
idea."
  "Ah, this was all your idea then?"
  "Yes," Jamie said stubbornly, glaring at
Hoag who started to open his mouth. "I suggested it
and, and the others were good enough to go along with it. It was the
tai-pan's wish--it was Malcolm's wish and
Mrs. Struan's. No harm was done."
  "I most assuredly disagree. The whole
idea's macabre, you deliberately went against
my considered opinion, there seems to be an
astonishing breakdown of reasonable thinking and a
desire of all assembled here to avoid telling
me the truth, the simple explanation, and have
colluded to hide ... to hide what? Don't you
agree, Phillip?"
  Tyrer jerked in his chair. "Er, yes sir if
you say so."
  "Why the use of a real coffin and real body?"
  Hoag shifted uncomfortably in his seat. They
all knew that any moment he would break.
Angelique decided that now was the time and she
began to cry. "Why don't you just leave us alone,
we did no harm, just did what we thought best,
what my husband wanted, what I wanted for him
..."
  "Angelique, please don't cr--"
  "... that he wanted and you forbade. It's your
fault, Sir William, I thought you were our
friend, if you were our friend and you'd been ... been
reasonable we wouldn't have had all this trouble, of
course it wasn't nice to do anything underhand even
though I think you were quite wrong and ..."
  "Mrs. Struan, I on--"
  "... of course that wasn't nice, none of us
wanted to do that, but at least we did it in good
faith, before God, at least these friends, real friends
helped to do properly what my husband and I ...
it wasn't much to ask ..."
  For a moment she was going to flee the room but
wisely did not, realizing that that would solve nothing
and leave the others at his mercy so she stayed where
she was, dissolving into ever more heartbreaking sobs,
knowing she had not lied and had said nothing more than the
truth: it was his fault!
  In seconds they were all around her, trying
to calm her, all feeling terrible, except
Skye who was awed by the brilliance of her timing,
and Sir William who was privately amused
though, for face, pretending to be equally upset.
He watched and waited, still disgusted with
all of them for whatever machinations they had jointly
conceived. What had possessed them and who was the real
culprit? Surely not Jamie? Bloody
stupid to do what they did. Ridiculous.
Stupid to risk their lives like that.
  People are no damned good. Even Angelique.
Ah, but what a lady, and what a treasure and
what an actress--where in the name of God does
she get it all from? Like most girls of her age,
her education is minimal, in her case convent which
is a bloody sight worse. Is Heavenly
coaching her for the trial of the century? Or am I
just a cynical old fool? Either way, I will
really be sad to lose her.
  His mantelpiece clock chimed quarter to the
hour. Time for church, he thought, time to stop--he was
reading the lesson and had not yet had time to skim
through it.
  "There there, Mrs. Struan," he said as a good
though stern father would. "No need for tears, we've
all had enough of them recently. I must confess I
still totally disapprove of the escapade, very poor
show, but under the emotional circumstances I think
we'll let it rest there, for the moment." Again he
pretended not to hear their audible relief, or
to notice the subsidence of her sobs. "Now,
it's time for church, and then the mail ship and our
wishes for a bon voyage and a long life will go with
you. Truly we will be very sorry and very sad to see
you leave our shores."
  "I, I'm not leaving yet, Sir
William."
  "Eh?" Sir William and Tyrer were
flabbergasted.
  Between sobs, her head bowed, she said, "Dr.
Hoag has advised me not to travel for at least
a week."
  Hoag said quickly, "That's right, medically not a
good idea, Sir William, not a good idea at
all, no not at all." This morning Skye,
supported by Jamie, had insisted that it was best
she did not go for a time. "A medical
certificate is what she needs, Doctor, one
you can attest to with Tess Struan. With all this
emotion, surely she shouldn't travel or have any
confrontations until she's stronger?"' Hoag had
readily agreed, and said to Sir William, "As
you can see she's easily upset, and I've
given her a certificate, not that it's necessary."
  For a moment Sir William did not
know what to think. On the one hand they had not lost
her, on the other the irritant that she already was,
and the thorn she was bound to become when Tess
Struan's wrath fell on her and all of them,
would still be in his jurisdiction. "You really should go,
Ma'am, I would have thought it very important to be
at the funeral."
  "I want to go but ..." Her voice broke
and a fresh sob racked her. "Dr. Hoag is,
is going in my place, I really don't feel
up to ... it's best ..."
  "But Jamie, you'll be going too?"
  "No sir. There are things I've been ordered
to do here by Mrs. Tess Struan."
  "Bless my soul." Halfheartedly Sir
William tried to dissuade her, then sighed.
"Well, if Dr. Hoag says so, that's the end
of that, he is the Struan doctor." He got
up. Openly relieved, they thanked him and began
to leave. "A moment, Dr. Hoag, a word if you
please." He hid his pleasure seeing Jamie
and Skye blanch and said pointedly as they hung
back, "G'day Jamie, Mr. Skye.
Phillip, no need for you to stay."
  The door closed. Hoag was like a rabbit before
a cobra.
  "Now, Doctor, quietly tell me the
truth, how is she?"
  "She's very well, on the surface, Sir
William," Hoag said, at once. "It's a
surface cure. What's underneath no one knows.
It could last days, weeks, a year or more--then the
nightmare will return. What will happen then ..."
He shrugged.
  "You'll be seeing Tess Struan?"
  "Yes, as soon as I arrive." Hoag
waited shakily, dreading the questioning, knowing he would
fail.
  Thoughtfully Sir William got up and poured
a whisky and gave it to him. The liquor
vanished. "You won't be coming back here for a time,
if ever. I need to know, in confidence, what
medically are the chances of her carrying Malcolm's
child?"
  Hoag blinked, the liquor and the unexpected
gentleness calming him and putting him off balance,
not expecting this line of questioning. He said with great
sincerity, "Of course that's up to God, sir.
But Malcolm was healthy and so is she, both fine
people, unfortunately both star-crossed--
so sad. I'd say the chances are very good for this was
no idle fancy, their lovemaking must have been very
passionate, as near a true love as I have ever
seen."
  Sir William frowned. "Good. When you see
Tess Struan ... I think our Mrs.
Struan will need all the help she can get.
Eh?"
  "You may rest assured I'll intercede for
her."
  Sir William nodded and reached into his
drawer. The envelope was sealed and addressed
Personal, Confidential and Private, by hand,
to Sir Stanshope, Governor of Hong Kong,
from Sir William Aylesbury, Minister to the
Japans. "I have an official commission for you,
a secret one. I want you to deliver this
personally to the Governor, as soon as you
arrive."
  He scrawled on the bottom "Delivered
by hand by Dr. Hoag" and had decided to use him
the moment he had heard Jamie would not be on the
mail ship, there being no one aboard Prancing
Cloud he could trust. "It must be given over
personally, to no one else, no one is to know you
are a Queen's courier. Clear?"
  "Yes sir, of course, Sir William,"
Hoag said, proudly.
  He knew that now Hoag was putty and he could
extract anything he wanted from him. Who began
the escapade, what was in their minds at sea and
why they did what they did, what really happened
at Kanagawa. He smiled to himself, enjoying his
position and for his own reasons let the matter rest.
"Have a safe voyage, and I look forward
to seeing you in Hong Kong."
  "Thank you sir."
  Hoag fled, ecstatic to have escaped with his
honor intact. Jamie and Skye were waiting
anxiously on the High Street. "Nothing,
honestly," he said excitedly, "he just wanted
to ask medical questions, private ones."
  "You're sure?"
  "Cross my heart and hope to die. Hurry
up, time for a quick one before church. I still feel
washed out." They went off happily, not noticing
Sir William watching from his window.
  I wonder how happy those rotters would be if
they could read my letter to the Governor, he thought
scowling. They're not off the hook yet,
none of us are. As if one coffin mattered when the
whole world's falling apart, Russia teetering
towards war again, Prussia licking her chops
over the intestines of central Europe, the
French with their militant, overblown pride, our
Indian Empire and Asian colonies at
risk because of misguided fools in Parliament, and
us awaiting imminent Japanese liquidation.
  On the surface the letter was innocuous.
Decoded it read: Urgently request all
fleet and army reinforcements possible as I
expect the Settlement to be attacked any day
by Bakufu samurai legions and may have
to abandon our base here.

  The Catholic church was candle-lit, the altar
glinting, the congregation sparse and Father Leo was
bringing the singsong litany of Mass to a close,
his deep baritone voice melodious amidst the
familiar perfume of incense that drifted over them
--the service shorter than usual as a few had
to catch the mail ship.
  Angelique knelt at prayer in the front
pew, Seratard beside her, Andr`e some rows behind,
Vervene at the back with the rest of the Legation
staff, a few traders, Eurasian
Portuguese, and some officers and men from the
French ships who had shore leave. The main
body of French sailors had other services,
earlier or later. Thankfully for all ships
companies, there were no priests with the fleet--to have
one aboard always considered bad luck, on any
ship of any flag.
  Father Leo bowed to the altar, prayed and then
blessed the congregation. Angelique took a deep
breath, leisurely finished her prayer, waiting
for Seratard to move.
  She had already been confessed. In the little box
she had said, "Forgive me Father for I have
sinned."
  "What sins have you committed this week, my
child?"'
  She had heard the barely disguised impatience
to learn every thought and deed that had happened, this being the
first time she had been to Confession since the troubles
began. "I forgot to ask the Blessed Mother for
forgiveness in my prayers one night," she said with
perfect calm, continuing her pact, and the plan and
words she had devised, "and had many bad thoughts and
dreams, and was afraid, and forgot I was
in God's hands with never a need to fear."
  "Yes, and what else?"'
  A little smile settled, hearing the impatience.
"I sinned in that though my marriage is legal
in the sight of my husband's people and his law and his
Church there was no time for us to make it conform to the
True Church."
  "But ... but that, that, senhora, that is not, not of
itself a sin, you were not responsible for that, he was
taken from us. What, what other sins did you
commit?"'
  She kept her nostrils closed as much as she
could to the stench of garlic and stale wine and unwashed
clothes, using a pomaded kerchief. "I sinned
in that I could not persuade Sir William
to allow me to bury my husband as he wished and
therefore I wished."
  "That ... that in itself is not a sin, child. What
else?"'
  "I sinned in that I could not persuade my
husband to become Catholic before we married."
  "Nor is that a sin, senhora. What
else?"'
  Now he was beginning to sound exasperated. As she
expected. How odd I'm no longer petrified
of him and can hear the nuances he seeks to hide.
Is this another gift of God?
  "Have you, did you commit sins of the flesh?"'
  Her eyes narrowed, the smile froze and she
despised him even more, at the same time forgiving
him some of it because of his magnanimity in blessing the
other coffin. "I have been a correct wife in
accordance with the teachings of the Church."
  "Yes but, but did you cohabit with him, not being
prop--"'
  "I was properly married according to my husband's
law and acted in accordance with the teachings of the True
Church," she said, adding with an even sharper edge,
"and now I would like absolution, Father." This was
contrary to accepted practice and she waited,
holding her breath, ready to sweep out if he
probed further against accepted practice.
  "As ... as you are leaving today, it is necessary
to ensure, senhora, to give absolution th--"'
  "I am not leaving by mail ship, Father. Not
today."
  "Oh, not leaving?"' she heard the elation and
relief, "then, then we can talk, my child, talk
at length for the Glory of God. Oh how
wonderful are the ways of God."
He had given her absolution and a modest penance
and she had left to join the service.
  Having overcome that hurdle she enjoyed it.
Her mind wandered but that was normal. Now she could
relax and was pleased with herself. She had achieved
what she had set out to achieve: Malcolm
buried here, as she wished, Gornt launched,
Hoag on his way, Tess neutralized--with the
help of God.
  God is on my side, I'm sure of it.
He approves, I'm sure of it. Except
for Malcolm, ah Malcolm my love, my
love ...
  "May I escort you home, Angelique?"
Seratard asked, interrupting her daydreams.
  "Thank you, Monsieur," she said formally, "but
I am not very good company and would rather stroll
quietly by myself."
  "There is a lot to discuss before you leave."
  "Oh, I thought you would know already I'm not leaving
with the mail ship--Dr. Hoag forbade it, which
saddens me."
  His smile broadened. "Magnificent! That
is the best news I've heard in many a day.
Would you care for dinner at the Legation tonight, just two
or three of us--quietly?"
  "Thank you but again no. Perhaps the end of the week,
if I feel better."
  "Thursday or Friday, whenever you wish."
Seratard kissed her hand, and she walked into the
open air.
  The wind had freshened again. She was glad for the
veil that camouflaged her, no need to hide behind the
front of her face. Those who passed greeted
her sadly, Nettlesmith among them. "We will
truly be sorry to see you go, Ma'am."
  "Thank you, Mr. Nettlesmith, but I'm not
going by the mail ship, not today." Again she saw the
face light up the moment she said it and was amused.
"Dr. Hoag has forbidden me to travel, which
saddens me."
  "Oh! Of course it would. Not going, eh!
Oh! Well yes, I can see that, oh, will you
excuse me, Ma'am?" He rushed for the Club.
Within minutes the news would be around the Settlement
and there would be no need to say it again. Down the
praia she saw Andr`e. He was waiting for her.
"Hello, Andr`e."
  "I'm glad you're not going," he said
simply.
  "Ah. News travels fast."
  "Good news. I need to talk privately."
  "About money?"
  "About money. How you've changed,
Angelique."
  "For the better, I hope. How are you, old
friend?"
  "Old." Andr`e was feeling drab today, and
tired. He had seen Hinodeh last night and there
had been shadows between them. And violence. While
she was massaging him he had lifted up and reached
into the neck of her kimono to kiss her breast,
loving her to distraction, but she had jerked away and
closed her kimono against him. "You promise not
to ..." she had gasped, and his fury at himself
for forgetting--any such trespass sent her into a
pathetic, hangdog sorrow that would craze him
further--turned into fury at her and he had
snarled, "Stop looking like that, stoppit!
Baka!"
  There were never any tears when he was there, just the
constant, abject muttering, "Gomen
nasai, Furansu-san, gomen nasai
gomen nasai gomen nasai" on and on
until the words maddened him and again he shouted,
"Shut up for Christ's sake!" She had. And
stayed kneeling, eyes downcast, hands in her
lap, immobile except for an occasional
tremble like a whipped dog.
  He had wanted to apologize and hold her in
his arms, his love unending, but that would not help him,
only make him lose further face so he just
got up sullenly and dressed and without a word
left their home. Once he was out of the Yoshiwara
and across the bridge he went down to the shore and
kicked the nearest fishing boat and cursed it
until he was spent. Then he sat on the cold
pebbles, choked with frustration knowing that she would be
weeping and equally angry that she had not managed his
mistake more cleverly, knowing that tomorrow they would begin
again as though nothing had happened but he was sure, not
far below the sweet and gentle demeanor was a vast
reservoir of hatred. For him.
  "And why not?" he muttered.
  "Why not what, Andr`e?" Angelique asked.
  "Oh! Nothing, just wandering."
  "Look there's an empty seat. We can sit
there and talk."
  The bench faced the sea. The mail ship
beckoned her attention and she wondered
what would have happened if she had decided to go
aboard. I'd only have gone into the Lioness's den
earlier than necessary, she thought. No need to worry
about that, no need to worry about anything--merely
to ease into my new being, testing its limits, and
wait. The smoke plume began trickling
upwards. The mail ship was getting up steam.
Only a few tenders remained at her
gangway. "I'm not very good company, sorry,"
she said.
  "Could you let me have some money?"
  "I have only a little. How much do you need?"
  "A thousand guineas."
  "What on earth for?"
  He took a deep breath. "Her name is
Hinodeh," he said and told her a story of
falling in love and wanting her for himself and nothing
about the real reason, his sickness. "It's
difficult to tell everything, of course I can't,
but I cannot live without that woman and the money is
needed for her contract, I've got to have it. I
must."
  "There's no way I could find that amount,
Andr`e," she said, genuinely shocked but moved.
"What about Henri, surely he could provide you
with a loan?"
  "He's refused, and refused to advance me
anything on my salary, I think he enjoys my
dependence."
  "If I was to talk to him an--"
  "No, you mustn't, that would be the worst thing to do."
He looked at her in a new way. "When you
get your marriage settlement, I pray it's
fast, I'll work to make it fast, I want you
to lend it to me, a thousand."
  "If I can, I will, I will, Andr`e."
  "Can you let me have some now? A hundred, that will
keep the mama-san off my back for a week--she
was the one who helped you," he added, driving in a
nail.
  She let that pass, well aware of the many ways
he had helped her, or had promised never
to mention any of them, her mind jumping forward to new
conclusions: this Hinodeh is an added security for
me. "I'll ask Jamie for an advance."
  "There's the money Sir William said you could
keep, two hundred and sixty-three guineas,
wasn't it, from the safe."
  "Yes, there's some of that left." She looked
out to sea to avoid his eyes, their
disturbing intentness, wondering how he knew and
to mask her abhorrence of this different Andr`e with his
underlying, searing edge of hysteria. Foolish to be
like that, doesn't he realize our Fates are
locked together? But then he is in love so I can
forgive him. "I sent some home."
  "I'm working on your behalf, Angelique, every
day with Henri. The Ward of the State, he's
sure of it. Henri's important to your
future, he and the Ambassador will be your
champions in the coming fight, I guarantee it.
You're wise to stay here and wait, it's safer,
better," he said and she remembered how, not so
long ago, he had told her it was vital for her
to go.
  He was watching her, hard to see her clearly
through the veil, remembering the signed affidavit
he had deposited with his will in the British
Minister's safe, not trusting Seratard--against
any "accident" happening to him. The affidavit
that told about the Tokaid@o assassin's
lovemaking and the abortion--when and how it was achieved
and the evidence buried--and about the death of the
assassin. Then there was the second page of the letter
her father had written her months ago that he had
torn up in front of her but had put back
together, the page that would damn any marriage
settlement that Tess Struan might agree to when
the screws were really turned on her--all of it
to use, when necessary, Angelique his only
passport to possession of Hinodeh and a comfortable
future.
  Raiko and Meikin and selling secrets and
buying secrets? A pipedream, he told himself
bitterly. I've given them the whole campaign
plan and what have I in return? Promises--and
no chance to offset those against my other debt. "A
hundred," he said, too tired and angry to say
please.
  She did not take her eyes off the sea.
"How long will we have to wait? For Tess to act."
  "It depends how Tess receives the news, or
Hoag, what she does at the funeral. She will
wait your thirty days--are you carrying or are you
not--before deciding," he said in the same
matter-of-fact voice, ramming back the past,
wanting her dependent again. She looked back at
him, glad for the veil. He thought her eyes were
friendly--perhaps afraid, perhaps not. "Add ten days
for that news to reach her. Ten to think, ten
to send a message back. About two months,
perhaps less."
  "What will the message be?"
  "Venomous." His own eyes slitted. "But
I've a few ideas, plans. I can help
to make you a rich woman. We have to wait, nothing
to do for a while, just wait. Patience,
Angelique. Patience and a little luck ...
I've ideas."
  And so have I, Andr`e Blackmailer. Many.
And plans. For you, Tess, and for the future.
  Tenderly she leaned over and touched him. "I'm
so glad you have a love to cherish. You're blessed,"
she said, meaning it. Then, as only a woman could,
she put that tenderness aside forever, and her plans
back in place. "The money will be waiting for you
at six, Andr`e--I'm glad you're my friend."
  "I'm glad too ... thanks for the loan."
  "So again we must be patient, both of us, and
wait? That is what we must do, yes? A little
luck and patience? I can be patient. A little
luck and patience. Good. So be it."
  He watched her walk away, straight and
confident and, for all her splendid petiteness,
somehow tall.
























            BOOK FIVE

                 

                YEDO

    Thursday, 1st January 1863:
  Toranaga Yoshi had arrived back in Yedo
Castle from Ky@oto eight days ago, tired and
angry, the journey from Hamamatsu way station a
forced march.
  The lines in his face were etched deeper. Where
men were afraid of him before, now they were petrified.
His anger would turn on them like a lash. During the
journey he had driven himself and them, sleeping
only a few hours, demented by any delay,
dissatisfied with the Inns, the baths and food and
service and the future. Captain Abeh bore the
brunt, all of them knowing it was only frustration and
grief over the death of Koiko, the beloved.
  Abeh had arranged her cremation, and that of
Sumomo, and then they were in the saddle galloping the
leagues, all aware such a gallant fighter
deserved a courteous bow from the conqueror in front
of the fire--particularly as the fighter was shishi and a
woman who soon would be subject of songs and
legends, as would the blow that had sliced her in
half. And Koiko the Lily too, she who
threw herself in the way of the first shuriken and so had
saved the life of their Lord, to whom he had then
given the gift of painlessness.
  But Yoshi, Guardian of the Heir had said
coldly, "Their death poem is this:

"From nothing into nothing,
A corpse is a corpse,
And nothing--
Mine, yours, even theirs.
Did they exist? Do we exist?"'

  Onwards, under the lash, then gaining the castle.
But still no rest there, the castle and Yedo and the whole
Kwanto in uproar over gai-jin preparations for
war--precipitated by the tair@o's
ultimatum, as he had expected.
  "It was inevitable," Yoshi said at the meeting
of the Elders he had immediately called for, adding,
to give Anjo a way to extract himself, "You were
given ill advice--remove the fool who
suggested it and drafted the letter."
  "It was the Emperor's command, and the
Sh@ogun's, that all gai-jin be expelled,"
Anjo said angrily.
  "Command? The Sh@ogunate commands, not an
underage boy who mouths the words the Sh@ogunate
puts into it--or the Emperor, who can only
request us to do something!"
  "As tair@o I considered the ultimatum
necessary."
  "And again I ask, what do you propose we do
when the fleet comes here?"
  "They will not, we attack first," Anjo had
said, then winced as a pain stabbed him, holding his
side. "I have them surrounded, Yokohama is like
a dead fish waiting for gutting. The attack force
is almost ready."
  "And their fleet?" he had asked, furious that
all his advice had been discarded and once again they
were in a trap of their own making. No point in
reminding Anjo, and the others, of the plan he had
meticulously set up to provide months of time
for further delaying tactics against the gai-jin,
while the Sh@ogunate gathered strength and more
particularly dealt with the vital, pressing problem
of smashing the hostile coalition of Tosa,
Choshu and Satsuma that would destroy the
Sh@ogunate if allowed to prosper.
  "First we surprise Yokohama, burn it,
I suggested it months ago," Toyama said,
shaking with excitement. "Burn them!"
  "And how do you sink the fleet?" Yoshi
snarled. He had noticed Anjo's pain and was
glad of it, remembering his pact with Ogama of
Choshu that must be instituted quickly to keep that enemy
off balance and neutralized.
  Toyama said fiercely, "The gods will sink
their ships, Yoshi-dono, like they did against
Kublai Khan and his Mongols. This is the Land
of the Gods, they will not fail us."
  "And in case the gods are away, or
sleeping," Anjo said, "we are going to send out
fire ships--I have hundreds already under
construction, hundreds. If the enemy break through this
barrier to bombard Yedo, only peasants,
tradesmen, artisans and parasitic merchants will
die, our legions will be intact."
  "Yes, they will be intact," Toyama said
gleefully.
  Anjo rushed on, "Once Yokohama is
gone, the gai-jin fleet must sail away because
they've no base where they can regroup.
They must sail far away to their colonies in
China, there will no longer be a foothold here.
If they come back we'll ..."
  "When they come back," Yoshi had said.
  "All right, Yoshi-dono, when they come back
with more ships we will sink them in the Shimonoseki
Straits, Ogama will, or elsewhere for by that time
we will have more cannon, fire ships, and we never
allow them to land in force, they will never be able to land in
force and set up a base, never again. No more
Treaties to protect them! None. We close
our land like before. That is what I plan," Anjo
said triumphantly. "I have torn up the
Treaties as the Emperor wants!"
  "You are godlike, tair@o, the gods will
protect us with a Divine Wind," Zukumura
chuckled, wiping saliva off his chin.
  "The gods won't protect us from gai-jin
shells," Yoshi said, "nor fire ships. If
we lose Yedo we lose our Sh@ogunate
citadel, then every daimyo in the land will join against
us to carve up the spoils--led by Ogama of
Choshu, Sanjiro of Satsuma and Yodo of
Tosa. Without Yedo our Sh@ogunate is over,
why cannot you understand that?"
  Anjo had twisted under another pain and flared,
"I understand very well you think you are the Lord of the
Land and the gods' gift to Nippon but you are not, you
are not, you are under my orders and my command, I am
tair@o, I AM!"
  "You are tair@o and ... but why are you in
pain?" he asked with a pretense of concern--as though
he had just noticed--wanting to stop the confrontation.
"How long has this been going on, what does the
doctor say?"
  "Say? He ..." Again Anjo sipped some
of the bitter extract of herbs. The medicine
allayed his pain hardly at all. The pains had
been getting worse, with this new Chinese doctor
useless like the others, so much so he was even considering
a clandestine examination by the famous gai-jin
doctor giant of Kanagawa. "Never mind my
pain. I know you."
  Yoshi saw Anjo's hatred, knowing the hatred
was because of his own youth and strength--little does the
fool know how tired of life I am. "Can I
..."
  "You can do nothing. We will attack when I
order the attack and that is the end of it! The
meeting is over." Anjo stormed out.
Now that he was tair@o, Anjo ruled
imperiously and treated all others with olympian
disdain.
  In a fury Yoshi prowled the castle like a
caged tiger. After that first awful day he had
compartmentalized Koiko and locked it tight. Even
so from time to time she would peep out smiling.
Angrily he would thrust her back--no way
to find out now if she had really rushed forward
to save his life as Abeh assured him, no way
to find out why she had employed a shishi
assassin, Sumomo Fujahito, of course a
false name but certainly one of Katsumata's
acolytes.
  And where is Katsumata now?
  He had already issued orders to find him, wherever
he was, and had put a large reward on his
head, and orders to hunt down and destroy all
shishi and their protectors. Then he had sent for
Inejin, his spymaster.
  The old man had limped in and bowed. "It
seems, Sire, the gods guarded you like one of their
own."
  "By allowing a shishi assassin, shuriken-armed,
to be in the inner sanctum of my courtesan," he
exploded, "allowing my courtesan to be a
traitor and part of the plot?"
  Inejin shook his head, and said easily, "Perhaps
not a traitor, Sire, nor part of a plot,
merely a woman. As to the shishi, Sumomo, she
simply exercised your fighting ability which proved
to be perfect--for which you were trained."
  The singular strength of his old retainer sent his
rage to China. "Not perfect," he said,
ruefully, "the cat clawed me, but the wound
healed."
  "Shall I drag Meikin, the mama-san, here,
Sire?"
  "Ah, the pivot. I have not forgotten her.
Soon, not yet. You still watch her?"
  "Like her second skin. You sent for me,
Sire?"
  "I want you to find Katsumata, alive if
you can," he had said. "Did you remove the
traitor ronin working for the gai-jin as I ordered?
What was his name? Ori Ryoma, a Satsuma,
yes that's it."
  "That man is dead, Sire, but it seems he
was not the traitor. Gai-jin killed Ori some
weeks ago. They shot him trying
to break into one of their houses. The man supplying
them with information, still, is a Choshu ronin named
Hiraga."
  Yoshi was startled. "He of the poster? The shishi
who led those who murdered Utani?"
  "Yes Sire. For the moment I cannot remove
him, he is under the protection of the Chief
Ing'erish and stays close to their building. I have
a spy in the village and can tell you more in a few
days."
  "Good. What else? All this talk of war?"
  "I hope to have more news in a few days."
  "Make it fewer than more," he said curtly,
dismissing him. "When you have serious news come
back."
  Inejin won't fail me, he thought, sorry that
he had been short-tempered. Spies must be
cherished like no others ... on them depends your
ability to move ... Ah, Sun-tzu what a
genius you were--but even my intimate knowledge of your
precepts do not tell me what to do about the
gai-jin, about that stupid boy and my arch enemy, the
Princess Yazu--both still gorging on the honeyed
gruel served by Court sycophants obeying that
dog, the Lord Chancellor. What would you do
to destroy the enemies that surround me? Anjo, the
Elders, the Court, Ogama, Sanjiro--the
list endless. And impossible. And atop them all,
the gai-jin.
  Then he had remembered the invitation to go aboard
the Furansu--French--warship. The coaling
venture that his wife, Hosaki, had positioned in
conjunction with the Gyokoyamas and the gai-jin
prospector, made it easy for him to send
Misamoto, his make-believe samurai, the
fisherman interpreter, to make the arrangements.
This had taken place yesterday.

  He had slipped away from Yedo by oared
galley to a sea rendezvous without fanfare, just
beyond sight of land--with Abeh, twenty guards and
Misamoto. The experience had been awesome. The
size and power of the ship's engines, and cannon, the
amount of powder and shot and coal carried, and the
stories they told, lies or truths he could not
yet tell about the extent of their Furansu
Empire, its wealth and power, the leagues of
travel such a ship could cover, numbers of
warships and cannon, and size of their armies as
they stated them, were beyond belief.
Misamoto interpreted, with the interpreter who
called himself Andreh Furansu-san. Though they
had their own language this meeting was conducted
mostly in English.
  A lot of what he was told, Yoshi had not
understood. The words used were strange and much time was
spent explaining miles and yards and powder and
pitch and pistons, paddle steamers against screw
power, breech blocks and flintlocks,
factories and firepower.
  Yet all of it was illuminating and certain
pieces of information of major importance: the
vital necessity of coaling facilities and
safe harbors, without which steamer warships were so
many hulks--unable to carry all the coal needed
for the voyage out, for naval operations, and then the
voyage back. And second, as he had witnessed
at the Council meeting with gai-jin in Yedo
Castle and found it difficult to believe the true
extent, any mention of Ing'erish gai-jin brought
sneers to Furansu gai-jin faces who had no
hesitation in showing the extent of their hatred.
  This delighted him and enhanced what Misamoto
had said earlier, that Ing'erish were hated by nearly every
other nation on earth because they had the biggest
Empire, they were the strongest and wealthiest nation,
with the greatest, most modern fleets, the most
powerful, disciplined and best-equipped armies, as
well as enjoying their gains by producing more than
half of the world's goods. With, best of all, an
impregnable island redoubt to guard it all.
  Of course they are hated. Like we
Toranagas are hated. And therefore, he thought with
an ache in his bowels for his past mistake, these
Ing'erish gai-jin are the ones to be fawned on,
to befriend, and handle with the most exquisite care.
Best fleets? And arms? How could I tempt
them into building me a fleet? Providing me with
one? Would coal pay for it?
  "Misamoto, say to them that I would like to learn
more about these marvelous Furansu devices," he
said blandly, "and yes, I would like friends amongst
gai-jin. I am not opposed to trade--perhaps I
could arrange my coal concession to go to the
Furansu and not the Ing'erish."
  This caught their immediate interest. At this time they were
below decks in the largest cabin in the stern, that he
found cramped and foul-smelling, with odors of oil
and coal smoke and human waste, with a fine
coating of coal dust everywhere. They
sat around a long table, half a dozen officers
in gold-braided uniforms and their leader,
Seratard--Serata as it was correctly
pronounced--in the center. Abeh and half his
guards were at his back, the rest on deck.
  The moment he had seen Seratard and heard his
name he liked him immediately--totally different from the
tall, sour-faced Ing'erish High Leader with the
unpronounceable name. Serata, like
Furansu-san Andreh, were easily
pronounceable. In fact the names were Japanese.
Serata was a miraculous omen.
  Serata was the name of his family's ancestral
village in which their ancestor, Yoshi-shigeh
Serata-noh Minowara had settled in the twelfth
century. In the thirteenth, the warrior daimyo
Yoshi-sada Serata, raised an army against his
overlords, the Hojo, obliterated them and
captured their capital Kamakura and made it
his own. Since then his direct descendants, the
Yoshi noh Toranaga noh Serata still ruled
Kamakura--Sh@ogun Yoshi Toranaga being
buried there in his great mausoleum.
  "So we are related," he had joked, after
explaining the coincidence to Seratard. Seratard
had laughed and, with the others who chattered like so many
monkeys in outlandish uniforms, then had explained
that his own family was an ancient one in
Furansuland too, but in no way as
illustrious.
  "My Master," Andreh said with a bow, "my
Master, he greatly honored be friend and gai-jin
part of your great family, Sire."
  "Tell him that I consider his name a good
sign," he had said, noting this man seemed much more
than just interpreter.
  "My Master thanks and says what Ing'erish
promise, Furansu promise better."
  Misamoto said, obsequiously, "Lord, he
means they will make a better deal--money
arrangement. The Furansu make cannon as
well as Ing'erish though not as many."
  "Tell them I will consider a proposal
to give them the coal concession. They must tell me
how many guns or cannons, with powder and shot, and
when I can have them, for how much coal. And I want
a steamer, a steamship with officers to train my
officers and sailors. In fact," he added
innocently, "perhaps I could grant Furansus the
sole right to build, sell and train a
navy. Of course I would pay. If
reasonable."
  He saw Misamoto's eyes widen, but before
Misamoto had time to begin, the gai-jin Andreh
who had been listening equally carefully, "My
Master sure King of Furansuland, greatly
honor assist Lord Yoshi Toranaga in
ships." Fascinated, he watched Andreh turn
to Leader Serata and begin talking, the naval
officers listening and nodding, quickly becoming as
excited. Astonishing how easy to manipulate
these men with trade and the future promise of
money, he had thought. If the Furansus react
so quickly, surely the Ing'erish leader will do so
also. Two fish fighting for the same hook is
better than one.
  They had talked of other matters, not enough time
to cover them all, but he learned enough to want to learn
more. One detail Andreh Furansu-san had
mentioned had rocked him. They had been discussing
modern medical knowledge, and how easy it would be to train
and equip a hospital: "Chief Medicine
Doctor in Kanagawa good, Sire. Hear
Tair@o Anjo sick. Hear maybe
tair@o see Chief Doctor-sama."
  "When and where is this meeting to take place?"
  "My Master say: not sure if arranged
yet, Sire. Perhaps Chief Medicine Doctor
help tair@o."
  "If a meeting is arranged, tell me.
Tell Serata also that a hospital is an
interesting possibility."
  He decided to let it go at that. For the moment.
But that was another piece of information that Misamoto
had better forget. How can I get a personal
interpreter I can trust? I must have one. Perhaps
I should train Misamoto, he is my running
dog, dependent and in my grasp. So far he
has been obedient. Certainly he handled the
prospectors well. Pity he was away,
detailing progress to Hosaki, when they fought--
like wild beasts, the samurai reported, how
apt! Had Misamoto been at the mine, perhaps
he could have stopped them. Not that it matters, one
dead is one less to worry about, and surely the
survivor is not long for this world. Coal! So we
have an abundance of coal, Hosaki says, and that
for these gai-jin coal is as good as gold.
  Deliberately, he changed tack. "Ask
Serata-san why gai-jin fire
cannon and rifles and send warships up and down
to disturb the peace of this Land of the Gods? Do they
prepare for war?"
  There was a silence. The mood reversed.
  "My Master say, no prepare war." He
saw Andreh gai-jin was translating
meticulously. "Prepare defend only. So
sorry, tair@o say all gai-jin must
leave."
  "Why not leave for a month or two and then
return?" He laughed inwardly seeing the
consternation this generated.
  "My Master says, Treaty signed by Lord
Sh@ogun and made true by Bakufu leader
Tair@o Ii, and Most High Emperor,
allow us Yokohama, Kanagawa, Kobe
soon. Treaty is good treaty for Nippon,
gai-jin. Tair@o Anjo, so sorry, wrong
to be angry."
  "Many daimyos do not think so. Tair@o
Anjo is the leader. You should do what he orders.
This is our land."
  "My Master says Furansu want help
Nippon be great nation in world ... as here too."
  "Say to Serata-sama, the tair@o is the
leader, what he says is to be obeyed, though
sometimes," he said delicately, "even the
tair@o may change if given the correct
advice." He saw this register. "So sorry,
we have explained a dozen times that Satsuma
matters may only be resolved by Sanjiro, the
Satsuma daimyo."
  "My Master say hope someone can give
correct advice to tair@o. Satsuma
daimyo must say sorry, pay indemnity agreed
in Yedo meeting, punish killer openly."
  He had nodded as if gravely concerned.
Abruptly, he got up to more consternation--no
point in further talk with these underlings who were
valuable in other ways, the Ing'erish Leader must
be approached. This suited him perfectly. And
while he kept his demeanor haughty and stern,
he showed some friendliness and agreed, with pretended
reluctance, to another meeting. "Misamoto,
tell them we can meet in ten days, in Yedo.
They may come to Yedo for a private meeting."
  Just as he was leaving the warship, the gai-jin
Andreh said, "My Master wish you Good New
Year." Dumbfounded, he learned that the gai-jin
world had its own calendar, totally
different from the Japanese--and Chinese--lunar
calendar that had been the way to count the days and the
months and years since the beginning of time.
  "The first day of our year, Serata-sama,"
Misamoto explained, "is between 16th day of
First Month and 22nd day of Second Month
depending on the moon. This year, the Year of the
Dog, First Day, which begins our season of
festivals is the 18th of First Month. That's
when all China says Kung Hay Fat
Choy."
  All the way back to Yedo in the galley
Yoshi had wondered about these men. Mostly he was
appalled--gai-jin were like monsters in the shape of
men who had come from the stars, their ideas and
attitudes the wrong side of yin and yang.
  Yet for us to survive as a nation, Nippon
has to have bigger ships and guns and more power
to protect themselves from this alien evil. And for now,
he thought, feeling nauseated, the Sh@ogunate must
make an accommodation with them.
  They will never go away, not all of them, of their
own accord. If not these, others will come to steal our
heritage, Chinese or Mongols or Hairies
from the Siber Ice lands who eye us like slavering
dogs from ports stolen from China. And always the
Ing'erish will be around us. What to do about them?

  That was yesterday. Last night and in this dawn he
had been deep in thought, hardly eating, hardly
sleeping, conscious too of the emptiness of his bed
and of his life--the seams of Koiko's compartment
leaking--like Anjo's, and Ogama's and the others.
Many times during the journey here from Ky@oto he
had thought of the clean sword, the cleanliness and
peace of death, the minute and the hour and the day chosen
with godlike power--to chose your own death time made
you a god: from nothing into nothing. No more sorrow
grinding you to petals of pain.
  So easy.
  The first ray of dawn came through the shutters,
touching his short sword. It was beside the bed with his
long sword, both within perfect reach, his rifle
there as well, loaded, the one he had named
Nori. The short sword was an heirloom
made by the Master Swordsmith Masumara and
once possessed by Sh@ogun Toranaga. He
saw the old used scabbard and through it, in his mind,
the perfection of the blade. His hand stretched out,
caressing the leather, then moved up to the
hilt to rest on the small toggle secured to it.
His father had instructed their swordsmith to attach it
before presenting the sword to him, formally, in front
of their inner circle of retainers. Yoshi was
fifteen then and had killed his first man, a ronin
who had run amok near his family castle,
Eagle's Nest.
  "This is to remind you of your oath, my son: that
you will carry this blade with honor, that you will use
only this blade to commit seppuku, that you will only
commit seppuku to avoid capture on a
battlefield, or if the Sh@ogun orders it
and the Council of Elders confirms the order
unanimously. All other reasons are
insufficient while the Sh@ogunate is in
jeopardy."
  A terrible sentence, he thought, and lay back
on his bed, safe for the moment in this room high up
in his castle quarters where he had had so much
pleasure. His eyes went back to the short
sword. Today his need was very great. In his imagination
he had rehearsed the act so many times that it would be
so smooth and kind and releasing. Soon Anjo will
send men to arrest me and that will be my excuse ...
  His sharp ears heard footsteps. Marching
feet. His hands took up the short sword and the
long sword and he was in defend-attack
position.
  "Sire?"
  He recognized Abeh's voice. That did
not mean safety, Abeh could have a knife at his
throat or Abeh could be a traitor--after
Koiko everyone was suspect. "What is it?"
  "The man Inejin begs to see you."
  "Have you searched him?"
  "Seriously."
  Yoshi used the rope he had had rigged,
allowing him to slide back the bolt on the
reinforced door without moving.
  Inejin, Abeh and four samurai waited there.
He relaxed. "Come in, Inejin." Abeh and the
others of his personal guard started to follow.
"There's no need, but stay within calling."
  His spymaster came in and closed the door,
noticed the bolt arrangement but did not comment, and
knelt ten paces away.
  "You've found Katsumata?"
  "He will be in Yedo within three days, Sire.
His first place of calling will be the House of
Wisteria."
  "That den of scorpions?" Yoshi had not
closed the trap on mama-san Meikin to learn
the real extent of the plot against him before taking
vengeance--vengeance best savored calmly. And
he did not yet feel calm. "Could we take
him alive?"
  Inejin smiled strangely. "I doubt it, but
may I tell the story in my own way,
Sire?" He settled his aching knee more
comfortably. "First about the gai-jin: a development
hoped for and encouraged since the beginning has
happened. A gai-jin spy has offered their
battle plans for money."
  His attention soared. "Not false ones?"
  "I do not know, Sire, but it was whispered they
contained troop and ship movements. The price was
modest, even so the Bakufu official did not
buy at once and began to haggle and the seller
became frightened. With Anjo at the head ..." The
cracked leather lips twisted with disgust at the name.
"He's baka, unworthy!--if the head is
rotten the body is worse."
  "I agree. Stupid."
  Inejin nodded. "They forgot Sun-tzu again,
sire: To remain in ignorance of the enemy's
condition, begrudging the outlay of a few hundred
ounces of silver is the height of inhumanity.
Fortunately an informant whispered about it to me."
Inejin took a scroll from his sleeve and put it
on the table. Yoshi sighed, pleased. "So
ka!"
  "With the help of my informant, I bought it for you,
a gift, Sire. Also at great risk to my
informant, I substituted a false scroll the
Bakufu eventually will buy cheaply."
  Yoshi did not touch the scroll, only looked
at it with anticipation. "Please allow me
to reimburse you," he said. Inejin covered his
vast relief for he had had to pledge their Inn to the
Gyokoyama to obtain the money. "See my
cashier today. Is the information to be trusted?"
  Inejin shrugged. Both knew another of
Sun-tzu's precepts: An inside spy
is the most dangerous, one who sells secrets
for money. It takes a man of genius
to penetrate such. "My informant swears that the
information is to be trusted and also the spy."
  "And it says?"
  "The gai-jin plan is frighteningly simple.
On Battle Day, ten days after their
ultimatum is delivered--if not complied with--their
whole fleet moves against Yedo. The first day the
attack area is furthest from the coast, Sire, the
extreme range of their heaviest cannon,
designed to pulverize all bridges and roads
leading out of Yedo--these are pinpointed, more knowledge given
them no doubt by the traitor Hiraga. That
night, by the light of the fires they have begun, they
bombard the castle. The next day the coastal
areas are decimated. On the third day they will land
a thousand rifle soldiers and drive for the castle
gates. There they will mount siege mortars and
smash the gates and bridges and as much of the castle
as they can. On the fifth day they retreat and sail
away."
  "To Yokohama?"
  "No, Sire. The plan says they will
evacuate all gai-jin the day before Battle
Day and retreat to Hong Kong until the spring.
Then they will come back in force. The cost of the war--
as with their Chinese wars, and is their custom--will be
doubled, and demanded as reparations from the Sh@ogunate
and the Emperor as well as complete access
to all Nippon, including Ky@oto and an
island ceded in perpetuity, to cease
hostilities."
  Yoshi felt a chill. If these barbarians
could humble all China, Mother of the World, eventually
they would humble us, even us. Complete access?
"This ultimatum? What further impertinence is
this?"
  "It's not in the scroll, Sire, but the spy
promised details, as well as the Battle
Date and any changes."
  "Whatever the cost, buy them--if true these could
make a difference in the outcome."
  "Possibly, Sire. Part of the information is
about gai-jin countermeasures. Against our fire
ships."
  "But Anjo told me they are secret!"
  "It's not secret to them. The Bakufu is a
rice sieve for the interested, as well as
corrupt, Sire."
  "Names, Inejin, and I'll spike them."
  "Begin today, Sire. Begin at the top."
  "That's treason."
  "But the truth, Sire. You enjoy truths, not
lies, unlike any leader I have ever known."
Inejin moved his knees, the ache intolerable. "The
matter of this spy is complicated,
Sire. It was Meikin who told me about him
..." Yoshi grunted. "Yes, I agree. But
Meikin told me, Meikin who diverted the
intermediary from the Bakufu to me, Meikin who will
substitute the false document, at great
danger, for she must attest to its truth, Meikin
who desperately wishes to prove her loyalty
to you."
  "Loyalty? When her house is a sanctuary
for shishi, a meeting place for Katsumata, a
training bed for traitors?"
  "Meikin swears the Lady was never part of a
plot against you, never. Nor was she."
  "What else can she say--the maid was,
eh?"
  "Perhaps she speaks the truth, perhaps not, but perhaps,
because of her grief, she now sees the error of her
past, Sire. A converted spy can be most
valuable."
  "Katsumata's head would make me more sure.
If caught alive, more so."
  Inejin laughed and bent forward and dropped his
voice. "I suggested she should quickly provide you
with details about the traitor Hiraga before you
request his head."
  "And hers."
  "A woman's head on a spike is not a
pretty thing, Sire, old or young. That is an
ancient truth. Better to leave it on her
shoulders and use the venom, wisdom, cunning or
simple rottenness that any such a woman
possesses to your advantage."
  "How?"
  "First by giving you Katsumata. Hiraga is
a more complex problem. She says he is the
intimate of an important Ing'erish official
close to the Ing'erish Leader, named Taira."
  Yoshi frowned. Another omen? Taira was
another Japanese name of significance, an
ancient regal family related to the Yoshi
Serata line. "So?"
  "This Taira is an official, an
interpreter-in-training. His Japanese is already
very good--the Ing'erish must have a school like the one you
proposed and the Bakufu "consider.""
  "Consider, eh? Taira? Is he an ugly
young man, tall with blue eyes, huge nose and
long hair like rice straw?"
  "Yes, yes that would be him."
  "I remember him from the meeting of
Elders. Go on."
  "Meikin has heard his grasp of our
language improves rapidly, helped by a
whore called Fujiko, but more because of this Hiraga
who has cut his hair in gai-jin style, wears
gai-jin clothes." The old man hesitated,
loving the telling of secrets. "It seems this
Hiraga is the grandson of an important
Choshu shoya who was permitted to purchase goshi
status for his sons, one of whom, this Hiraga's
father, is now hirazamurai. Hiraga was chosen
to join a secret Choshu school where, as an
exceptional student he learned Ing'erish." He
suppressed a smile seeing his Lord's face.
  "Then the spy is not gai-jin, but this
Hiraga?"
  "No Sire, but Hiraga could be a serious
secondary source of intelligence. If he could
be tapped."
  "A shishi helping us?" Yoshi scoffed.
"Impossible."
  "Your meeting yesterday, aboard the Furansu
ship. It was profitable, Sire?"
  "It was interesting." Impossible to keep those
ventures secret. He was glad Inejin was so
well informed so quickly. Abeh and half a dozen
of his men had been present at the meeting. Who
had spoken in their cups? It didn't matter.
It was to be expected. Nothing compromising was said
by him.
  "Abeh!" he called out.
  "Sire?"
  "Send a maid with tea and sak`e." He said
nothing more until it had been served and accepted
gratefully by Inejin, sifting the information, sorting
it and coming up with new questions and answers. "What do
you propose?"
  "It would not be for me to propose what you have already
surely decided, Sire. But it did occur
to me, when and if the Ing'erish Leader sends his
ultimatum, you alone would be the perfect person
to mediate--alone, Sire."
  "Ah! And then?"
  "Amongst other things you could ask to see this
Hiraga. You could weigh him, perhaps persuade him
to be on your side. Turn him to your
advantage. The timing could be perfect."
  "That could be possible, Inejin," he said, already
having discarded that for a much better thought, one that
fitted the plan he had discussed with
Ogama in Ky@oto, and his own need to begin the
grand design. "Or an example might be
made of this Hiraga. Catch Katsumata,
he's the head of the shishi snake--if Meikin is
the means to deliver him alive, so much the better
for her."

  A few miles away on the Tokaid@o
Road, at the Hodogaya way station,
Katsumata scrutinized the crowds from a
Teahouse window. "Be patient, Takeda," he
said, "Hiraga is not due till midmorning.
Be patient."
  "I hate this place," Takeda said. The
village was in open country with few places
to hide and barely three miles from the Yokohama
Settlement. They were in Teahouse of the First
Moon, the same that Katsumata and daimyo
Sanjiro had stayed at after Ori and Shorin had
attacked the gai-jin on the Tokaid@o. "And
if he does not arrive?" The youth scratched his
head irritably, his chin nor his pate not shaven
since their escape from Ky@oto and now covered with
stubbled hair.
  "He will arrive, if not today, tomorrow. I must see
him."
  The two men had been hiding here for a week.
Their journey from Ky@oto had been arduous, with
many narrow escapes. "Sensei, I do not like this
place or the change of plan. We should be in
Yedo if we're to carry on the fight, or perhaps
we should turn around and go home."
  "If you want to go on, go. If you want
to walk back to Choshu, go," Katsumata said.
"The next time you complain you are ordered to leave!"
  Takeda apologized at once, adding, "It's
just that we lost so many men in Ky@oto, we do not
even know how shishi have fared in Yedo. So sorry,
yes, but I keep thinking we should have gone home like
those who survived, me to Choshu you to Satsuma
to regroup later."
  "Hodogaya's perfect for us and this Inn is
safe." Warned that Yoshi had put a heavy
price on his head, Katsumata had decided
to be prudent and not continue. "Tomorrow or the next
day we'll go on," he said, glad for the youth's
value as a shield to his back. "First
Hiraga."
  It had been difficult and dangerous to contact
him. Few people here had access through the
Yokohama barriers, or to the gai-jin
Yoshiwara. New passes were continually being
issued, new passwords. Enforcer patrols wandered
at large. Covert pockets of samurai
swarmed around Yokohama, almost cutting it off from
the rest of the land.
  Then three days ago Katsumata had found a
maid whose sister was a midwife who went to the
Yoshiwara from time to time. For a golden oban the
midwife agreed to carry a message to the
mama-san at the House of the Three Carp.
  "Takeda, stay here and keep watch. Wait
patiently."
  Katsumata went down into the garden and strode
through the front gates onto the Tokaid@o,
bustling with morning travellers, palanquins,
porters, soothsayers, scribes, samurai, and
some ponies carrying women or ridden by samurai.
Talking, shouting, screeching. The morning was cold
and everyone wore padded jackets and warm head
scarves or hats. A few samurai eyed
Katsumata but not rudely. The way he
walked, the filthy thatch of hair and beard, the
long sword in a back scabbard, another in his
belt, shouted caution to the inquisitive.
Clearly he was a ronin of some kind and to be
avoided.
  On the outskirts of the village, inside the
well-guarded barrier, where he had a good field
of view towards the sea and Yokohama, he sat
on a bench at a roadside eating stall.
  "Tea and make it fresh and see that it's
hot."
  The frightened stall owner rushed to obey.

  At the Settlement, a group of mounted
traders clattered over the bridge, raised their
hats politely or saluted the North Gate
guards with their riding crops in return for
perfunctory bows. Other traders, tradesmen,
soldiers, sailors, Drunk Town riffraff
were on foot, all of them on a holiday morning
outing. Today was New Year's Day.
Horseraces were scheduled for this afternoon and then,
later, an interservice football match. It was
cold though fine, the wind slight but sufficient
to take most of the smell of winter and decaying
seaweed and human waste further inland.
  One of the riders was Jamie McFay.
Close beside him was Hiraga, a scarf
covering most of his face, his riding cap down over
his eyes, his riding clothes well cut. This outing
was not approved or even known to Tyrer or Sir
William, the gift in return for interpreting
between Jamie and the shoya, and also for providing him with
business information.
  Yesterday Hiraga had said, "I answer more
question during ride, Jami-sama. Need go, to go
Hodogaya, meet cousin. P'rease?"'
  "Why not, Nakama, old chap?"' McFay
had not visited the village for months though it was
within the agreed area of the Settlement and was glad
for the excuse. Few traders ventured that far now
without military escort, Canterbury's murder
and Malcolm Struan's fate never far from all
their thoughts.
  Today McFay was feeling good. In the last
mail a statement from his bankers in Edinburgh had
led him to discover he was in better shape than he
had thought, more than enough to start on his own in a small
way. The Noble House was in good hands and that
pleased him. Struan's new manager, Albert
MacStruan, had arrived from Shanghai. He
had met him in Hong Kong three years ago when
MacStruan had first joined the company. Six
months training in Hong Kong under Culum
Struan, then to Shanghai where he had quickly
become their Deputy Director.
  "Welcome to Yokohama," Jamie had
said, meaning it, liking him though knowing little about him
except he was good at his job and his branch of the
clan was black Highlander--a Scots and
Spanish blood line from one of the thousands of
Spaniards of the Armada who had been
shipwrecked in Scotland and Ireland and
survived, but never to return.
  Here he would be taken as Eurasian though no
one challenged him. Legend whispered that he was
another of Dirk Struan's clandestine,
illegitimate children whom Dirk had secretly
sent home to Scotland with a stepbrother,
Frederick MacStruan, both heavily endowed
by him, shortly before he died.
  "Dreadfully sorry about seeing you under these
rotten circumstances, old chap."
MacStruan's accent was patrician, Eton and
Oxford University, with a trace of Scots.
He was twenty-six, a chunky, dark-haired
man, with golden skin, high cheekbones, dark
sloe eyes. Jamie had never asked
him about the legend, nor had MacStruan
volunteered anything. When Jamie had first
arrived in Hong Kong, almost twenty years ago,
it had been made clear to him by Culum Struan,
then tai-pan, that here you don't ask questions,
especially about the Struans--"We've too many
secrets, too many black deeds to forget,
perhaps."
  "Everything's in order, and don't worry about
me, Mr. MacStruan," Jamie had said.
"I'm ready for a change." And though, now, no
longer formally with the Noble House he was still helping
him, bringing him up-to-date on projects and
deals, introducing him, with Vargas, to their
Japanese suppliers. The books were in good
order, the coaling venture with Johnny
Cornishman had begun perfectly and should be
highly profitable, the quality of the coal first
rate, and further arrangements made to fill a
barge a week for the next three months as a
trial period.
  Generously, MacStruan had given him a
twenty percent share of the profit for the first year, and
then approval to deal on his own account with
Cornishman: "... should that little bounder still be
alive," he had said with a laugh.
  Thanks to Hiraga, Jamie's secret
dealings with the shoya had blossomed and the first company
formed in principle: I.s.k. Trading--
Ichi Stoku Kompani--the shoya's wife
considering it prudent not to use their own name. The
stock was split into a hundred parts: the shoya had
forty, McFay forty, Ryoshi's wife
fifteen, and Nakama--Hiraga--five.
  Last week he had registered his own trading
company, tomorrow he was open for business in temporary
offices in the same building that housed
Nettlesmith's Guardian. For a week now,
Ryoshi's eldest son, shy, nervous and
nineteen, reported for work at 7:00 A.m.
daily and left at 9:00 P.m., there to learn
everything. Particularly English. And in the last
mail, an unexpected three month severance pay
arrived with a polite note from Tess Struan
thanking him for his services. Three months
isn't bad for nineteen years, he thought with grim
amusement.
  No word yet from Hong Kong, too early though
Prancing Cloud would have arrived ten days or more
ago, Hoag about a week. Four or
five more days at the earliest to hear anything, perhaps
longer, a huge storm rumored to be in the south
China seas, might delay that even further. No
point in trying to forecast times and weather.
  One day we'll have a telegraph to Hong
Kong, and one day, perhaps, the wire will go all the
way to London. My God, what a fantastic
boon to everyone to be able to get a message
to Hong Kong and a reply back in a few days--
and to London and back in what, say twelve
to sixteen days--instead of four months! Won't
be in my time but I bet the wire reaches Hong
Kong in another ten to fifteen years. Hooray
for Nakama and my partner Ryoshi, hooray for
my new company, McFay Trading. And
hooray for Angelique.
  Notwithstanding deep mourning, on Christmas Day
she had agreed to join the dinner he gave for
Albert MacStruan to which Sir William,
Seratard, Andr`e and most of the Ministers had come.
It had been a quiet success. Though she had
none of her previous gaiety, and little like her former
self, she had been gracious and sweet and
everyone remarked how even more beautiful she had
become in her new maturity. Tonight there was to be a
grand soiree at the French Legation to which they were
invited. Andr`e would be playing. It was doubtful
she would dance--betting was ten to one against. On
whether or not she was carrying, betting was still evens.
Hong Kong no one mentioned. Since their sea
adventure and her successful finesse of Sir
William, they had become firm friends and dined
privately most evenings.
  Hooray for the New Year which will be marvelous!
  In spite of his good humor a twinge went through
him. Actual business was dicey, civil war
around Shanghai brewing again, plague in
Macao, the American civil war dreadful,
famine in Ireland, rumors of famine here,
riots in the British Isles over
unemployment and factory wages. Then there's
Tess Struan.
  Damn it, I promised myself not to worry about
her from January 1/, 1863 onwards! Or about
Maureen ...
  To escape his anxiety he used his spurs.
At once Hiraga did likewise, both men
riding well. This was Hiraga's first ride in a
long time, his first time opportunity to move
semi-freely outside the
Settlement. He drew alongside Jamie,
then went ahead. Soon they were happily
galloping. Soon too they were alone, the others
having turned off for the racecourse. They
slackened pace, enjoying the day.
  Ahead they could see the twisting Tokaid@o,
broken here and there with rivers in flood and fords,
porters either side waiting to ferry or carry
waiting goods and people over the waters. Southward was
Hodogaya. Its barriers were open. In the good
old days before the murders, during spring and fall,
traders would visit the village for sak`e and
beer, taking their own picnic meals with them,
laughing and flirting with the coveys of maids who would
seek to drag them into their bars or restaurants.
They were not welcome in the many brothels.
  "Hey, Nakama, where are you meeting your
cousin?" Jamie asked, reining in on the
outskirts, not far from the barrier, more than conscious
of the travellers' hostility. But not worried.
He was armed, openly, with a shoulder-holstered
revolver--Hiraga was not, so he thought.
  "I 'rook for him. Best I go 'rone other
side barrier, Jami-sama," Hiraga said.
He had been overjoyed to get Katsumata's
message, at the same time filled with
misgivings, it was dangerous to leave the protection
of Sir William and Tyrer. But he had to have
news of Sumomo, and the others, and find out what
had really happened in Ky@oto, and what was the
new shishi plan. Daily the shoya had shaken his
head, "So sorry, Otami-sama, I've no
news yet about Katsumata or Takeda--nor
about the girl Sumomo, or Koiko. Lord
Yoshi remains in Yedo Castle. The moment I
have news ..."
  Still well muffled, Hiraga motioned Jamie
to lead. "P'rease, then I find good p'race for
you wait."
  The barrier guards watched them suspiciously,
bowing slightly and accepting their salutes.
Hiraga winced, seeing a poster of his likeness
attached to a wall. Jamie did not notice it
and Hiraga doubted if he, or others, would
recognize him with his European haircut and
mustache.
  Hiraga stopped at the first Inn. Using poor
Japanese and imitating the gruffness of other
traders, Hiraga found a table in the garden and
ordered tea and sak`e and beer, some
Japanese foods and told the maid to make
sure they were not disturbed and she would get a good
tip. The maid kept her eyes down but
Hiraga was sure that she had seen his eyes and
knew him to be Japanese.
  "Jami-sama, I back in few minutes,"
Hiraga said.
  "Don't be long, old chap."
  "Yes, Jami-sama."
  Hiraga sauntered out on to the roadway,
heading toward the far barrier. The general hostility
and ill manners infuriated him, a few
belligerent samurai and some travellers forcing
him to step aside and let them pass. At the
same time he enjoyed the fact that everyone took
him for gai-jin, and his scrutiny of every eating
place and bar as rude gai-jin curiosity.
Katsumata's coded message had said, "Come
to Hodogaya, any morning over the next three
days. I'll find you."
  Feeling conspicuous as indeed he was, he
walked past people loitering, or at benches and tables
or hunched over braziers who glared insolently
at him. Then he heard the low, signal whistle.
He was too well-trained to acknowledge it or
turn around. It seemed to come from his left side.
With pretended tiredness he chose a bench well
away from the street at the nearest eating house and
ordered a beer. The maid brought it quickly.
Nearby, peasants stooped and slurping over
bowls of morning rice gruel and hot sak`e
eased away as though he had plague.
  "Do not turn around yet," he heard
Katsumata say quietly, "I did not
recognize you, your disguise is perfect."
  "Yours must be too, Sensei," he said as
softly, hardly moving his lips, "Twice I
scrutinized this place carefully."
  The low, well-known and admired laugh.
"Drop something and when you pick it up, look around
briefly."
  Hiraga obeyed and when, momentarily, he saw
the only man within hearing, a wild-looking,
bearded, venomous ronin with the filthy thatch of
hair glaring at him, he turned his back once
more. "Eeee, Sensei!"
  "No more "Sensei." There is little time,
Hodogaya crawls with Enforcers and spies. Where
can we meet safely?"
  "Our Yoshiwara--the House of the
Three Carp."
  "I'll be there in two or three days--it is
vital to create an incident with the gai-jin,
quickly. Think about it."
  "What sort of incident?"
  "A serious one."
  "Very well," Hiraga said. "I was relieved
to hear from you--we had no idea you were coming here. There
have been wild rumors about fighting in Ky@oto--
Akimoto is with me but we are on our own and we
lost many shishi in our Yedo attacks. There is
much to tell about Yedo and the gai-jin. Quickly, what
happened in Ky@oto? Sumomo, how is she?"
  "Ky@oto was bad. Before leaving I assigned
Sumomo to Koiko who was returning here with
Yoshi, to spy on him to find out who was betraying
us--must be one of our men--too good an
opportunity to miss and it got her out of
Ky@oto safely," Katsumata said, his eyes
constantly raking, the other men in this eating place,
even though they were not near, avoided looking at
him. "We mounted two attacks on Yoshi,
both failed, our safe house was betrayed,
Ogama and Yoshi working together ambushed us. We
..."
  "Eeee," Hiraga murmured, gravely
concerned. "They have become allies?"
  "For the moment. We lost many leaders and men,
I'll give you particulars later but we,
Sumomo, Takeda, I and some others fought our
way out. I'm glad to see you Hiraga. Leave
now."
  "Wait. Sumomo, I ordered her back
to Choshu."
  "She brought me valuable information about the
situation here and about Shorin and Ori. I suggested
she continue on to Choshu but she wanted to stay,
thinking she might help you. How is Ori?"
  "Dead." He heard Katsumata curse--
Ori had been his favorite pupil. "The
gai-jin shot him trying to break into one of their
houses," he said hastily, his nervousness
increasing, "there's a rumor there was a shishi
attack on Yoshi at Hamamatsu, that
Koiko was killed in the melee, a shishi also.
Who was he?"
  "Not he, she. So sorry it was Sumomo."
Color drained from Hiraga's face. "Koiko
betrayed her, the whore betrayed her to Yoshi and so
betrayed sonno-joi and us. But she
died with Sumomo's shuriken in her chest."
  "How did Sumomo die?"
  "As a shishi, she will be remembered forever. She
fought Yoshi, with shuriken and long sword and almost
killed him. That was her mission--if she was
betrayed."
  So Sumomo had a mission, Hiraga thought with
sudden insight, his whole being a volcano--you
expected her to be betrayed and, even so, sent
her into the pit. There was a tightness in his throat.
He forced himself to ask the essential question: "How
did they bury her? Was it with honor?"
  If Toranaga Yoshi had not honored her
after fighting and dying bravely then he would hunt
him to the exclusion of all else, until one or
other of them were dead. Hiraga was leader of Choshu
shishi, the strongest contingent. Sumomo, though from
Satsuma, had declared her allegiance to him and
to Choshu. "Please, I must know, was it with
honor?"
  Still no answer. He glanced around.
Katsumata had vanished. Hiraga's shock was
open. The other customers stared at him silently.
To one side a group of samurai stood watching
him. The hackles on his neck rose. He
threw a few coins on the table and, his hand on his
concealed derringer, went back the way he had come.

  That afternoon, throughout Yedo Castle there was an air
of premonition. Yoshi was hurrying after the
Chinese doctor along a corridor, Abeh and
four samurai guards followed. The doctor,
tall and very thin, wore a long gown and his grey
hair in a queue. Up some stairs and along
another corridor and then the doctor stopped.
Hostile guards stood in the way, hands on their
swords, all their eyes on Yoshi and his men.
  "So sorry, Lord Yoshi," the officer said,
"the tair@o's orders are that no one should
pass."
  "And my orders," the doctor said, his fear
giving him false courage, "were to fetch Lord
Yoshi."
  "Lord Yoshi, you may pass," the officer said
grimly. "So sorry, your men may not."
  Though heavily outnumbered, Abeh and his men
went for their swords. "Stop," Yoshi said
calmly. "Wait here, Abeh."
  Abeh was sick with worry, adrenaline
pumping, dreadfully aware of rumors
in the castle that his master was about to be arrested,
rumors that Yoshi scoffed at. "Please
excuse me, Sire, but this may be a trap."
The opposing samurai stiffened at the insult.
  "If it is you may kill all these men,"
Yoshi said with a laugh. No one else laughed.
He motioned the doctor onwards having decided
that if they attempted to disarm him they might as
well fight and die now.
  They let him through unmolested. The doctor
opened the far door and bowed Yoshi through. Yoshi's
hand was not on his hilt but he was ready for an
assassin behind the door. There was none. Just four
guards around the futons in the big room. On the
futons, crumpled with pain was Anjo. "So,
Guardian of the Heir," he said, his voice weak
though spiced with venom, "you have information?"
  "For your ears."
  "Wait outside, Doctor, until I
call for you."
  The doctor bowed and left, glad to go. This
patient was impossible, he despised him, and as
he was slowly dying, only a few weeks or
months left, there would be no fee. In China such
was the custom, no cure no fee and it applied
here.
  The guards had not moved. Nor would they. The
four were noted fighters and completely loyal.
Some of Yoshi's confidence left him. He
knelt and bowed politely. This morning, after
Inejin had left, he had sent Anjo a
message asking for an urgent meeting to give him
important information.
  "Well, Yoshi-dono?"
  "Yesterday I went on one of the gai-jin
warships an--"
  "I know that, do you think I am a fool and that
I do not know what you are up to? You said medical
information."
  "The gai-jin doctor at Kanagawa. The
Furansu said he has made miraculous
cures, with your permission I will have him brought
here."
  "I do not need you for that." In agony, Anjo
raised up on one elbow. "Why so solicitous
when you want me dead!"
  "Not dead, in good health, tair@o-dono. It
is important to have you in good health." Yoshi
kept a tight hold, loathing this man and this room
with its stench of death and diarrhea and
vomit--at the same time afraid he had
miscalculated: This could easily be his death
trap should the sick man give the order. "Why be
sick if you can be cured? Also, I wanted
to tell you I have learned the gai-jin battle
plan, not on the ship but early today."
  "What plan, eh? How did you come by it?"
  "It does not matter, except I know so now
you know." He told him the substance of the plan,
accurately, but left out the part about the ten days of
grace after the ultimatum.
  "Then we must leave!" The voice became
shriller. The guards shifted nervously. "The
roju must leave secretly at once, we will
take up residence in ... in Hodogaya. When
we're safe we burn the Settlement by night and
catch them in their beds. What dogs! They
deserve to die foully, without honor. We burn
them out, kill all who escape, and return here
when the fleet's sailed away. In the spring we
will be prepared. We fire Yokohama tomorrow."
Anjo's eyes glittered, a string of saliva
wet his chin. "You have the honor of leading the
assault. Organize it, lead the attack tomorrow
or the next day."
  At once Yoshi bowed in thanks. "I
accept the honor, gladly, and while I
organize it, I have a notion: first your health.
Bring the gai-jin doctor here, ours are useless
and the Furansu swore the man is a miracle
healer. I can fetch him quickly and quietly, tomorrow
if you permit it. Why be in pain needlessly? The
gai-jin doctor will cure you," he said firmly.
"A few extra days will not interfere with your wise
attack strategy. Until you are well,
to command, we must keep the gai-jin off balance. I
can do that while arranging the attack."
  "How?"
  "By putting myself into their trap."
  "What?" The slight movement Anjo made
to see Yoshi better caused him to bite his lip
to prevent a cry of pain.
  "I will risk putting myself in their power, meeting
with them with only one of two guards. On the ship
I found out they are on the point of lashing out at
us, senselessly. We must prevent this at all
costs, Tair@o. They are as dangerous as a
pack of starving sharks." This was said with all the
sincerity at his command. He believed the
opposite: that gai-jin were ready
to negotiate and compromise, never really wanting
to war unless pushed too far ... like foolishly
attacking them.
  "It will be my risk," he said dangling the
bait with a pretense of fear. "If they hold me
hostage, that will cause all daimyos to rush to your
support. If they do not, never mind, in either
event, you forget that I am hostage and attack
them--all this, of course, with your permission,
Tair@o."
  The silence became heavy. Another spasm.
Then Anjo nodded agreement and waved a hand in
dismissal. "Fetch the gai-jin doctor at
once, prepare the attack at once."
  Yoshi bowed humbly, and with difficulty,
stopped himself from shouting with glee.

                 

              KANAGAWA

    Friday, 2nd January:
  As Yoshi rode up to the Kanagawa Legation
gateway leading the small procession, Settry
Pallidar, officer commanding the honor guard,
bellowed, "Present aaarrmms!" and saluted with
his sword. The soldiers brought their rifles off
their shoulders presented arms and stayed motionless:
thirty Guardsmen, thirty kilted Highlanders,
his mounted troop of Dragoons, equally smart.
  Yoshi returned the salute with his riding crop
and hid his anxiety seeing so many enemy soldiers
with so many spotless rifles. Never in his life had
he been so unprotected. Only Abeh and two
guards, also mounted, in attendance. Following were a
groom on foot and a dozen sweating, nervous
porters carrying heavy bundles on poles
swung between them. His other guards were waiting at the
barricade.
  He was dressed all in black: bamboo
armor, light helmet, wide-shouldered tunic,
two swords--even his stallion pony was jet.
But the tasseled trappings and reins and blanket
were deliberately scarlet, enhancing the black.
As he passed Pallidar, turning through the
gates, he noticed the cold blue eyes
reminding him of dead fish.
  On the steps above the beaten earth courtyard he
saw Sir William, flanked by Seratard and
Andr`e Poncin on one side, the
Admiral, Dr. Babcott and Tyrer on the
other--just as he had asked. All were dressed in
their best, with top hats and warm wool coats
against the damp morning, the sky overcast. His
gaze flicked over them, paused a moment on
Babcott, staggered by his great height, then he
reined in and saluted with his crop. They bowed as
casually, the Admiral saluted.
  At once Sir William, with Tyrer
close behind, came down to greet him, smiling--
both covering their surprise at the smallness of his
guard. The groom rushed to hold the head of his
pony. Yoshi dismounted on the right side as was
customary in China and therefore here.
  "Welcome, Lord Yoshi, on behalf of Her
Britannic Majesty," Sir William said.
Tyrer translated at once, carefully.
  "Thank you. I hope I am not putting you
to any trouble," Yoshi said, beginning his share of the
ritual.
  "No, Sire, our honor. You give us
rare, great pleasure." Yoshi noted an
improvement in Tyrer's accent and vocabulary and
was even more determined to neutralize the traitor
Hiraga whom, Inejin had found out, went under the
pseudonym of Nakama. "Please, Lord
Yoshi will you take tea?"
  Both men had already closed their ears to the
meaningless phrases, concentrating on the other man,
seeking clues that might help them. "Ah,
Serata-dono," Yoshi said pleasantly, though
he was irritated to be standing, having to look up
at them, their height--usually more than a head
taller--making him feel inferior, though amongst
Japanese, he would look down on most.
"I'm please to see you again so soon. Thank
you." He nodded to Andr`e, then Seratard who bowed
formally, Andr`e interpreting.
  "My Master Seratar' greet you, Sire,
on behalf of his friend, Emperor of Furansu,
High King Napoleon III. Honored to be
of service."
  The moment Yoshi had left Tair@o
Anjo, he had sent Misamoto with a letter
to Seratard asking him if he would arrange an
urgent, formal though very private meeting with
Seratard, Sir William, the Chief Officer
of the Fleet, the doctor of Kanagawa, and
interpreters Andr`e and Tyrer only--no one
else. He would arrive informally, with
minimal escort, and asked that ceremony be
minimal.
  "What do you make of it, Henri?"' Sir
William had asked when Seratard had hurried
to see him the moment Andr`e had translated the
letter.
  "I don't know. He's an impressive
man. He was aboard over four hours so we had
the opportunity of studying him carefully--perhaps
you'd like a copy of my report."
  "Thank you," Sir William said knowing it
would be revamped with all interesting information excised
--no more than he would do. He had a slight
cold and sneezed. "Excuse me."
  "As Guardian of the Heir, one of the
Elders, of an ancient Japanese royal
family--even connected to the Mikado, the
Emperor, whose function you may not know is
religious--this man is extremely well
connected and important in the Sh@ogunate. Why
don't we see him?"'
  "I will," Sir William had said dryly,
well ahead of Seratard's information having spent
many hours grilling Nakama for details of
important rulers and their families,
Toranaga Yoshi particularly. "We'll do
as he asks. Interesting that he wants Ketterer
there, eh? That's smelly. We'll go by boat and
take some crack troops, dress them up as an
honor guard and have H.m.s. Pearl cruising
offshore."
  "Mon Dieu, you suspect a trap?"'
  "It might be a cunning way to risk a
knight to sweep our command structure off the
board. Easy to sneak in samurai--Pallidar
says they're holed down both sides of the
Tokaid@o from here to Hodoyama and beyond. I
don't smell a trap but just in case we'll
put a round in the chamber. No French troops,
old man. Sorry, no. No, Henri! But why
should he want Babcott?"'
  "On behalf of France I proposed we
set up a hospital for them, to cement ties.
He was delighted ... never mind, William, you
can't think of everything. We discussed Babcott
who has a modest reputation. Perhaps Yoshi
wants to consult him." Seratard had seen no
reason to divulge the intelligence Andr`e had
uncovered about the tair@o's ill health.
  Japanese tea was served in the big
audience room. They seated themselves as protocol
dictated and prepared for the interminable politenesses
that would go on for an hour. One sip of tea and they
were flabbergasted to hear Yoshi say, "The reason
I called this private meeting, with the help of
Serata-dono ... naturally on behalf of the
tair@o and Council of Elders ... is because it
is time to make progress in our good relations."
He stopped and said curtly to Tyrer, "Please
translate that first and then I will continue."
  Tyrer obeyed.
  "First, the Doctor-sama, the rest of our
meeting does not concern him." Yoshi had
intentionally waited the three days to seek the
doctor. No need to hurry, he had thought
cynically: Anjo said he did not need me
to arrange it, let him ache!
  Abruptly a crick soared from his own stomach
at the thought of the unnecessary risks he had taken,
putting himself at the mercy of Anjo, who every day
became more dangerous. Stupid to agree to lead the
attack and plan it--that part done, too easy--for
he would have to do it unless he could finesse the
barbarians into doing his will today: "Would the doctor
please return to Yedo with me to examine an
important patient who may not be named. I
guarantee him safe passage."
  Sir William said, "An important
person such as Doctor-sama could surely not go
about without an escort."
  "I understand that, but in this instance, so sorry, it
is not possible," Yoshi said, and now, sitting as
he was on eye level with them all, except
Babcott, he was more at ease. "I guarantee
him safe passage."
  Sir William pretended a frown.
"George? What about it?"
  They had already discussed this possibility.
"I'd agree to go alone, Sir William.
One of my assistants told me the tair@o
is rumored to be sick. It could be him."
  "My God, if you could cure that bugger--or
poison him--I don't know which is best. Joking
of course."
  "It's no risk, not to me. I'm only
valuable alive and no use as a hostage.
To cure a V.i.p. would be terrific for us."
  "I agree. We'll play it by nose.
Talking of that, I heard Angelique consulted
you yesterday."
  "Ha! The whole Settlement seems to have
heard, you're the eighth who has sidled into that one!
She had a cold, in this weather everyone has a
cold, you have a cold, and even if she had
consulted me for any other reason, it is and always
would be private, so give over."
  Sir William smiled to himself remembering how
he had sniffed and protested he was not enquiring about
private matters, like her possible pregnancy.
Not many days to go and the whole Settlement nervous,
no one ready to put down big money yet on
what would be "P-Day," or if there would be none
--and less than five days for the first blast
to arrive from Hong Kong about Malcolm, the
funeral and what Tess Struan was going to do.
  Sir William pulled his mind back to the
issues at hand. Babcott was saying to Yoshi
directly in halting Japanese, "Yes, go
Yedo Lord Yoshi. When go, please?"
  Yoshi said slowly, "When I leave,
Doctor-sama. Thank you. I am responsible
for you. I will ensure you come back safely. You will
need an interpreter, yes?"
  "Yes, please, Lord Yoshi," Babcott
said, not needing one. He looked at Tyrer.
"You're elected, Phillip."
  Tyrer grinned. "I was going to volunteer."
  "Ask him how long I'll be there."
  "He says: however long it takes to make an
examination."
  "Then that's settled," Sir William said.
  "I'll leave you to it. I've a clinic going
on so you know where I'll be." The doctor bowed
to Yoshi, who bowed back and then he was gone.
  Choosing his words carefully and trying to talk
simply, Yoshi said, "Porters outside have
cases of silver coins to the value of one
hundred thousand pounds. This is offered by the
Sh@ogunate in full settlement of the indemnity
you have demanded from the responsible daimyo. In
principle, the Sh@ogunate considers this a
correct amount." He concealed his amusement at
Tyrer and Andr`e's shock. "Translate
exactly what I said."
  Again Tyrer obeyed, not exactly word for word this
time, but gave a credible pr@ecis, helped here and
there by Andr`e. There was a stunned silence in the
room.
  "Sire," Tyrer said weakly, "my Master
ask he answer now, or Yoshi-sama
say more?"
  "M. The Sh@ogunate advances this money on
behalf of Sanjiro of Satsuma. He alone
is responsible. As previously explained, he
is not subject to Sh@ogunate control--in all
things. Translate."
  Again this was done. He saw the two leaders were
off balance as he had planned. This was pleasing, but
did not allay his anxiety. "We cannot force
Sanjiro of Satsuma to cancel any orders he
may or may not have given his men about gai-jin--or
even to apologize--or make him repay the
money we are advancing to settle this matter
without waging war on him. This we are not
prepared to do."
  This translation required time to get it
accurate, Andr`e again assisting, aware of the tension
and the way everyone was concentrating.
  "Sire?"
  "Say this exactly and carefully: wanting to be
friends with the Ing'erish and Furansu, the
Sh@ogunate has solved what the Sh@ogunate
can solve ... without going to war." Yoshi sat
back, wondering if the bait was succulent enough.
  His last remarks were received in silence. He
noted Sir William was impassive now
except for an almost inaudible grunt. But
Seratard nodded and glanced at Andr`e.
  Inwardly a ferment of glee, Sir William
waited for Yoshi to continue. When he didn't,
he said, "Phillip, ask Lord Yoshi if he
wants to go on or I may now respond."
  "He says he does not wish to continue for the
moment."
  Sir William cleared his throat and spoke
grandly--to Tyrer's private dismay: "Lord
Yoshi, on behalf of Her Majesty's
Government, and the French Government, may I
thank you and the Sh@ogunate for obliterating part of the
problem between us. We thank you personally, wishing
to make our stay in your land happy and profitable for
your country, the Sh@ogunate and ourselves. This
gesture surely begins a new era of understanding between
our two countries--and those others represented in
Japan."
  He waited as that was translated, both Tyrer
and Andr`e apologizing and begging Yoshi's
forbearance, putting the message in simpler terms,
as accurately as possible. When they had finished,
Sir William said, "With his
permission I would like to take a short break.
Phillip, or Andr`e, please ask his
indulgence, apologies and all that, but explain
my bladder needs assistance. It's my cold."
  The two interpreters hastily translated.
  "Of course," Yoshi said at once, not
believing him.
  Sir William got up and Seratard made
his excuses and once in the corridor heading for the
pot that neither needed, Sir William whispered
excitedly, "My God, Henri, did you read
him like I did? He's saying we can go after
Sanjiro ourselves."
  Seratard was equally elated. "It's a
complete reversal of their policy that everything must
go through the Bakufu and Sh@ogunate. Mon
Dieu, is he giving us carte blanche?"
  "Pas ce cr@etin," Sir William
said switching to French without noticing it. "If we
can do it against Sanjiro, it's precedent to go against
any other daimyo--the Shimonoseki Straits
bugger for one. But what the devil's the quid pro
quo, eh?" He blew his nose loudly.
"There's got to be one."
  "I've no idea. Whatever it is it'll be
rare, mon brave. Astounding that he put himself
in our power, never thought he'd arrive with so few
men, surely he must have realized we could take
him hostage against Sanjiro's performance?"
  "Agreed. My Lord, what a step forward!
Unbelievable that he came to the point at once,
no fart-arsing about, never thought I'd see the day.
But why, eh? Something's smelly."
  "Yes. Merde, pity he's not tair@o,
eh?"
  Ha! My thought entirely, old boy, way
ahead of you, Sir William told himself. A
little push here, a little pull there and like in India we
could be off to the races!
  He had unbuttoned, and now, idly watching the
flow, his ears closed to Seratard's further
prognosis, he composed his thoughts, considering what
he could barter, how far to go, and how to get
Ketterer to agree without Admiralty or
Foreign Office approval. God damn the
fellow!
  And God damn Palmerston. I asked for
urgent approval to enforce civilized law so why
hasn't he replied? He probably has, he
told himself. London's coded
message went by telegraph to Basra and is now
somewhere on a mail ship in a diplomatic pouch.
His flow ceased. He shook himself, as always
remembering the schoolboys' admonition at
Eton: "If you shake it more than three times
you're playing with it." Quickly he stepped aside
for Seratard, buttoning up, noticing Seratard
was like a small horse in quantity and power.
Interesting. Must be the wine, he thought, returning
to the conference room.
  The rest of the meeting went breezily. With
skill and diplomatic care Sir William,
ably assisted by Seratard, established in a very
oblique way that "if a force happened to proceed
against someone like Sanjiro, for instance, against his
capital, for instance, it would be an extremely
unfortunate occurrence even though such action could
possibly be merited because of some unacceptable act
of murder committed against foreign nationals. This
act would precipitate a flurry of protests
from Yedo and would merit a formal apology if such
an inconceivable action was taken ..."
  Absolutely nothing was said directly, nothing
to imply that permission had been given or sought.
Nothing would be in writing. Such a possible major
hostile act, "a special case," could be
contained only if protocol was carefully
followed.
  By now, Tyrer and Andr`e both had splitting
headaches and were inwardly cursing their Masters for the
near impossibility of translating the necessary
obliqueness.
  Yoshi was silently ecstatic. Sanjiro was
as good as dead and the first barrier removed at no
cost. "I think we understand one another and can move
to other matters."
  "Yes, quite clearly." Sir William sat
back, and girded his loins for the quid pro quo.
  Yoshi took a deep breath and launched the
next assault: "Translate the following,
sentence by sentence. Explain this is for accuracy.
Say also for the moment this conversation must be considered a
State secret between us." Seeing Tyrer's
blank stare, he added, "Do you understand State
secret?"
  After consulting with Andr`e, Tyrer said, "Yes,
Sire."
  "Good, then translate: are we agreed this is
to be a State secret between us?"
  Sir William thought, In for a
penny in for a pound. "Agreed." Seratard echoed
him.
  Tyrer mopped his brow. "Ready, Sire."
  With an even firmer grip Yoshi said, "It
is my wish to modernize the Sh@ogunate and
Bakufu. Translate. To do this I need knowledge.
Translate. Ing'rand and Furansuland are the
most powerful outside nations. Translate. I
ask you to draw up various plans to help the
Sh@ogunate form a modern navy, dockyard and
modern army. Translate."
  Admiral Ketterer jerked upright, his neck
pulsating fire. "Keep quiet," Sir
William muttered carefully from the corner of his
mouth, "and don't say a word!"
  "Also a modern banking system and experimental
factories. One country cannot do everything. You are
rich, the Sh@ogunate is poor. When the plans
are accepted I will agree a fair price. This
will be paid for in coal, silver, gold and yearly
leases of safe harbors. I would like a
provisional answer in thirty days if this is of
interest. If yes, is one year enough time for
detailed plans to be approved by your rulers?"
  It was difficult for Yoshi to maintain outward
poise, and he wondered what they would say if they
knew he had no authority to make this offer nor
any way to implement any of it. The offer was
made to seduce them into a year's reprieve from
outside conflict, a delay he needed to stifle
internal opposition to the Sh@ogunate and to deal with
his prime enemies, Ogama of Choshu and Yodo
of Tosa, now that Sanjiro would be removed.
  At the same time it was a jump into the future,
into the unknown, one that frightened him and elated him in
a way he did not understand. All of the ideas were
based on information Inejin's spy had obtained from
the unsuspecting shoya Ryoshi about gai-jin
methods, and driven home to him by what he had
seen and heard on the warship that was immensely
impressive but nowhere near as big or as deadly
as the Ing'erish flagship.
  Hating the reality but accepting it, he had
realized, in self-defense, the Land of the Gods
had to become modern. To do this he had to deal with
gai-jin. He loathed, despised and distrusted them
but they had the means to destroy Nippon, at the very
least to put them back into the kind of civil wars that
had existed for centuries before Sh@ogun
Toranaga had tamed bushido, the
warrior spirit of the samurai.
  He watched the two leaders talk amongst
themselves. Then he saw the Ing'erish Leader speak
to the young interpreter, Taira, who said in his
quaint though understandable Japanese, "My Master
thank you, Sire, for ... for conf'dence. Need one
hundred twenty day send message to "Queen
Parliament" and "Furansu King" fetch ...
to fetch, bring back answer. Both leaders sure
answer is yes."
  A hundred and twenty days was better than
expected. "Good," he said grim-faced,
inwardly weak with relief.
  Now for the better part, he thought, seeing them
preparing to close the meeting. An eye for an
eye, a death for a death: "Lastly, I am sure
W'rum-sama does not know the man he shelters,
called Nakama, is a renegade samurai, a
ronin and revolutionary whose real name is
Hiraga, sometimes called Otami. I
require him at once. He is wanted for
murder."

         END OF VOLUME It


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume XI of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 2265-2490




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

            BOOK FIVE

                 

    Friday, 2nd January: (continued)
  At that moment, across the bay in the
Yokohama's Yoshiwara, Katsumata said,
"Hiraga, have you thought how we can infuriate the
gai-jin, a hostile incident to set them against the
Sh@ogunate?" The two men were sitting
opposite each other in a secluded little house in
the garden of the Three Carp.
  "Torching one of the churches would be easiest,"
Hiraga said, keeping his anger buried for
Katsumata was very perceptive--he had just
arrived, summoned from his village hideaway by a
sleepy servant. Except for a few
cook-house skivvies tending fires and cleaning,
no one was about. Raiko and her Ladies were still
sleeping--few would be up before midday. "That would
madden them, but first let me tell you what I've
achieved here an--"
  "Later, first we must make a plan. A
church? An interesting idea," Katsumata said,
his face cold and hard, no longer disguised as he
had been in Hodogaya.
  Now he appeared to be a bonze, a Buddhist
priest, clean-shaven but for a mustache. The thatch
had been a wig and was gone. His head had the stubble
of a bonze, he wore the orange Buddhist
robe and sandals and a belt of prayer beads. His
long sword in its back scabbard was beside him on
the futons and the mon, the five insignia on his
robe proclaimed he was a member of a
militant, monastic Order.
  These virtual military Orders were made up
of samurai who had relinquished their samurai
status to serve Buddha, permanently or
temporarily, to preach and roam the land doing good
works, singly or in bands, purging robbers and
bandits and protecting the poor from the rich and the rich
from the poor--and some monasteries. The Bakufu,
and most daimyos, tolerated them so long as they
kept their violence within bounds.
  At dusk last night he strode arrogantly
through the barrier, his false papers perfect. He
was a day late, unheralded, at once to be
given the best available bungalow by Raiko.
Unlike other shishi, unique amongst
them, his family was rich and he always carried
numerous gold oban with him.
  "A church," he repeated, relishing the idea,
"I would not have thought of that--we would leave a
message claiming it was done by the order of
Yoshi, Tair@o Anjo and the roju as a
warning for them to leave our shores. We need
revenge on Yoshi very much." A fleck of foam
gathered at the corners of his mouth and he brushed it
away angrily. "Yoshi is the archenemy. One
of us must go against him, he killed too many of our
fighters in Ky@oto, shot some personally. If
I could ambush him I would. That, too, later.
So, the church will be burned. Good."
  Hiraga was unsettled, finding Katsumata
strange, and different. Now he was impatient, and
acting as though he was a daimyo and Hiraga one
of his goshi to be ordered about. I'm leader of the
Choshu shishi, he thought with more anger, not a student
under orders of a Satsuma Sensei, however
renowned. "That would turn the whole of Yokohama
into a hornet's nest. I would have to leave which would be
bad at the moment, my work important for our
cause. The situation here is very delicate,
Sensei. I agree we must plan, for instance where
do we escape to, if we are to escape?"
  "Yedo." Katsumata stared at him. "What
is more important, sonno-joi or your safe
haven amongst enemy gai-jin?"
  "Sonno-joi," he said at once, believing
it. "But it's important we learn what they
know. To know your enemy like--"
  "I do not need quotations, Hiraga, but
action. We are losing the fight, Yoshi is
winning. We've only one solution: to turn these
gai-jin violently against the Bakufu and
Sh@ogunate. This will advance sonno-joi as
nothing before and takes precedence over everything. We
desperately need this, then we'll regain
support, and face, fighters will flock to our
standard, meanwhile the spearhead of shishi regroups
here and in Ky@oto, I will call for reinforcements
from Satsuma and Choshu and again we will attack the
Gates to release the Emperor. This time we'll
succeed because Ogama, Yoshi, and the stinking
Sh@ogunate will be distracted dealing with hostile
gai-jin. Once we have the Gates,
sonno-joi is a fact." There was no doubting
his confidence.
  "And if we agitate the gai-jin,
what then, Sensei?"
  "They bombard Yedo, the Sh@ogunate
retaliates by attacking Yokohama--both
lose."
  "Meanwhile all daimyo will flock
to support the Sh@ogunate when the gai-jin
return as they will."
  "They would not return before Fourth or Fifth
Month, if then. Before that we will have the Gates,
at our suggestion the Emperor will be pleased
to give the gai-jin the culprit, Yoshi, or his
head, Nobusada, Anjo, and any other heads
they need to slake their thirst for revenge. And at
our further suggestion the Son of Heaven will
agree to allow them to trade, without any more war, but
only through Deshima in Nagasaki harbor as they
did for centuries." Katsumata was sure.
"That's what will happen. First the church--what about
a ship?"
  Hiraga, startled, said, "What about one?" he
asked, his mind stuffed with arguments against what
Katsumata surmised, certain it would not happen
that way, at the same time trying to think of a way
to divert Katsumata, to make him go on to Yedo
and come back in a month or two--things were going
far too well here with Taira and Sir W'rum,
Jami-sama and the shoya to want to jeopardize that.
Plenty of time to enrage the gai-jin later with the
church when a safe retreat was th--
  "Sinking a warship would inflame them, wouldn't
it?"
  Hiraga blinked. "Like ... like nothing else."
  "We use the church as a diversion, while we
sink a ship, their biggest one."
  Dumbfounded, Hiraga watched Katsumata
open a backpack. In it were four metal
tubes, bound with wire. And fuses. "These contain
explosive, cannon powder. One of them,
fused, through a porthole or gun port, or
attached to the side of the ship would blow out the side,
two would be fatal."
  Hiraga was transfixed, all else
forgotten. He reached for a tube. In his hand the
bomb seemed to pulsate with life. At the top
was the small hole for the fuse and in his mind he
saw the fuse spluttering and his arm slip the bomb
quietly through the lowest gun port, then another--
then ducking back quickly into the boat that was largely
hidden by sea mist, silently away, and then,
safe, the vast explosion as the bombs
ignited other charges and then the great ship slipping
under the water.
  And with it all his own plans.
  "It's an enormous idea, Katsumata,"
he said feeling sick. "We'd need to pick the
correct time of the moon and the sea carefully, and
plan carefully. Spring or early summer would be
best. After that I could not remain here and ...
There's so much to tell you about what I've
discovered." He almost blurted out that he could speak
English well now but stopped. "Just a few more
weeks and I'll be done. Then the church and the
ship."
  "We burn the church and sink the ship tomorrow
night."
  "Impossible!"
  Katsumata was coldly amused by his shock
and thought what a shame Ori was dead and Hiraga
alive--Ori was so much more superior. But then
he, too, was Satsuma, not Choshu. "How many
times must I say surprise is our shishi's
best weapon. That and decisive speed. Where is
Akimoto?"
  "In the village. I thought it best not to bring
him now," Hiraga said, his mind flooded.
Since he had come back from Hodogaya he had
not shared his innermost thoughts with his cousin, only that
Katsumata had told him Sumomo was dead,
betrayed by Koiko to Yoshi, not that he believed
both had been thrown into the pit by chance. Like we would
be thrown away uselessly in this wild-eyed scheme
and all my work will have been in vain. "Tomorrow is too
soon. I suggest we ma--"
  "The church will be easy for one man.
Akimoto. We will need a dingy or small
fishing boat. Can you get one?"
  "Perhaps," Hiraga said, answering
automatically, fogged with myriad questions and
dreads. "Perhaps I could steal one. Sensei I
th--"
  "You are not thinking clearly. Fisherman always
remove the oars when the boat is not in use. No
need for that. Buy one." Katsumata took out a
small silk purse and put it carelessly on the
table. "Hiraga, concentrate!" he said, his
voice hardening. "Has living with gai-jin
infected you so much with their evils that you've forgotten
your oath to sonno-joi? Concentrate, the plan
is good, the timing is perfect. Could you buy a
boat?"
  "Yes, yes but, but, Sensei, where do we
retreat to?"
  "Retreat is simple. Three of us, you,
Takeda and me, we sink the warship. Then we
beach the boat as near Yedo as possible and lose
ourselves in the city."
  "What about the other man, the one who fires the
church?"
  "He will escape on foot."
  "We need more shishi in support, this is a
major task. This whole area will become
lethal."
  "That makes escape easier. Four men is
enough. I will lead the attack on the ship and if
tomorrow there's a wind the burning church may torch
all Yokohama, a further gift. Come back
tonight, bring Akimoto and I will make final
plans."
  "But--where's Takeda?"
  "I left him at Hodogaya. He will be here
this afternoon. Until dusk, Hiraga." Curtly
Katsumata bowed a dismissal.
  In turmoil Hiraga bowed back, too many
years an adoring, awe-struck student of the
Sensei, master swordsman and tactician, not
to accept the dismissal. He went out and stumbled
back across the bridge to the Settlement, along the
village street, later turned to the promenade
and walked back along it, seeing nothing, his head
a mess of dark thoughts and impossibilities, his
future in tatters all because this Satsuma
outsider was determined to shove destiny forward.
  But the Sensei is right, he brooded. Those
two acts would drive the gai-jin berserk, the
fleet would invest Yedo, Yedo would burn,
Yokohama would be decimated in revenge. In a
few months fleets would come, this time with armies.
By then shishi will not control the Gates, but all
Nippon would be up in arms. And it would make no
difference to the gai-jin.
  One way or another we will have to open to their world.
Gai-jin have decided. So they will have a base at
Yokohama and other places--because they have the power
to decimate our coasts and close our ports,
forever if they wish, and no Divine Wind will help
us.
  "'allo, mate, where you goin?"
  "Oh." He was standing in front of the Legation.
"'Morning Sir Sentry. I go
Taira-sama."
  "He's not 'ere, mate," the sentry said
yawning. "Mister Tyrer 'n the Guv, they's at
Kanagawa."
  "Oh?" Hiraga looked across the bay. The
seascape was wintery. He could just discern
Kanagawa. A frigate, he recognized it
as the Pearl, was steaming slowly offshore, against the
wind, neat, and deadly. In the roads the
flagship with its forty 60-pounders, was at anchor
into wind. "I come back 'rater," he muttered.
  Disconsolate, he wandered back to the
village. To buy a dingy. However much he
disapproved, he was shishi first.

  Early that afternoon in the wardroom aboard
H.m.s. Pearl Seratard clinked glasses
with Sir William, congratulating the other again
on the meeting.
  "A marvelous step forward, Henri, old
chap," Sir William said jovially. He
took up the bottle and rechecked the label.
"Not bad for a '48. Excellent repast too."
On the table were leftovers of the picnic lunch
provided by Seratard's chef: cold pigeon
pies, quiche, crumbs of the French bread
left, and a few slivers of a devoured Brie that
had arrived on the last merchantman from
Shanghai. "Still can't believe Yoshi offered
what he offered."
  "I agree. Marvelous is the word. We'll
train the navy, you take the army, we'll take
banking and customs and--"
  "Dreamer!" Sir William said with a laugh.
"But we're not going to quarrel about partitions,
London and Paris will do that." He belched
contentedly. "It'll come down to "how much" in
the end for obviously we'll have to lend the wherewithal
to buy our ships, factories or whatever--however
much they say they'll pay."
  "Yes, but there'll be the usual safeguards,
customs revenues etc." Both laughed.
  "There'll be more than enough for both our countries,"
Sir William said, still not quite believing it. "But
do me a favor, Henri, please don't bait
the Admiral, I've enough trouble as it is."
  "All right but he's so ... never mind. What
about this Nakama? Astonishing. I think you were
lucky he didn't kill you by night, you are their
number one enemy. What possessed you to take
such a risk?"
  "He wasn't armed, he was helping Phillip
with his Japanese," Sir William said. As
far as he knew only four of them, Tyrer,
McFay, Babcott and himself, knew the man could
speak English and there was no reason to share that
secret. "He was well watched," he added,
matter-of-fact, though another pang went through him
at the thought of the danger they had been in.
  "What are you going to do about him?"
  "What I told Yoshi."
  They had all been shocked at Yoshi's
revelations--Sir William almost as much as
Tyrer--particularly that Nakama was wanted for the
murder of Utani, one of the Elders, amongst
other killings. At once he had said,
"Phillip, tell Lord Yoshi as soon I
get back to Yokohama I will begin a formal
enquiry, and if the facts are as he says I will
return him at once to the authorities.
Phillip!"
  But Tyrer, speechless with disbelief, was staring
blankly at Yoshi. Andr`e recovered quickly and
translated for him, jerked as Yoshi snapped at
him.
  "He, er, Lord Yoshi says, You question my
words?"'
  "Say, Not at all, Lord Yoshi." Sir
William had kept his voice level for he had
seen the eyes narrow. "But as you have your laws or
customs, for instance your not being able to order this
daimyo Sanjiro to obey you, I also have to comply
with our laws which the Treaty specifies clearly
is Yokohama's dominating law."
  "He says, Sir William, Ah yes,
the Treaties. In this new spirit of friendship he
agrees to, to allow you the duty of giving up the
... the assassin. He'll send men to take
custody tomorrow. About the Treaty, sir, he says,
he said exactly, some changes are necessary, we can
discuss them in twenty days."
  Tyrer said quietly, "Excuse me, Sir
William, about Nakama, may I suggest
that--"'
  "No, Phillip, you may not. Andr`e, say
to him exactly: We would be honored to discuss
matters that affect our mutual interests at any
time." He had chosen the words very carefully and
breathed a sigh of relief when the reply came
back, "Lord Yoshi thanks you and says, We
meet in twenty days if not before and now
will return to Yedo with Dr. Babcott."
  When the politenesses and bows were done and Yoshi
had left the room, Seratard said,
"William, I think you slid out of that trap
cleverly. He's cunning that one.
Congratulations."
  "About the navy," the Admiral began
hotly.
  Sir William said, "First let me get
Babcott and Tyrer on their way. Come along,
Phillip!" and when he had got him outside
he hissed, "What the devil's the matter with
you?"'
  "Nothing sir."
  "Then why is your face around your ankles?
Why do you forget your job is just to interpret and not
make suggestions?"'
  "Sorry, sir, but about Nakama, sir--"'
  "I know it's about him for God's sake, you
practically shat all over the conference table! Do
you think our wily host didn't notice? Your
bloody job is to translate what's said and be
impassive and that's all. This is the second
bloody time I've had to caution you!"
  "Sorry sir, it's just that Nakama's
important and--"'
  "You mean Hiraga, or whatever other name
he's using at the moment? Jesus Christ, he's
accused of murder. I agree he's been a
fund of information but God Almighty, a
renegade outlaw? We're lucky he didn't
kill us in our beds when you think he's had the run
of the Legation and your quarters."
  "What do you plan to do, sir?"'
  "Damn it, what I've already said:
investigate and if it's true as I suspect it
is, we are honor bound to turn him over."
  "Couldn't you consider him a political
refugee?"'
  "Oh for goodness' sake! Have you taken leave of
your senses? We demand reparations and the murderers
for the murder of our nationals, so how the devil can
we refuse to return to them one of theirs who's
accused and probably guilty of murder of one of
their rulers? Yoshi promised him a fair
trial."
  "He's a dead man, that's all the trial
he'll get."
  "If he's guilty that's all he
deserves." He had held on to his
temper for Tyrer had done a good job today and he
had noticed the growing friendship between the two of them that
had worked to his advantage: "Phillip I
know he's been tremendously valuable but he has
to be turned over to them--after I've seen him. I
warned him in the beginning that he would have to go if they
asked for him. Now forget Nakama and make
sure you learn all you can about Babcott's
patient. With any luck it'll be the
tair@o."
  He led the way to the forecourt where Yoshi was
mounting. Babcott waited beside a horse
Pallidar had lent him, another for Tyrer. The
honor guard was on alert surrounding them. At
Yoshi's order the porters stood away from their
poles with the bundles attached, then he beckoned
Tyrer who listened, bowed and came back.
  "He said you can, er, count the money at your
leisure, Sir William, please give him
a receipt tomorrow. That man," Tyrer pointed at
Abeh, "will come for Nakama tomorrow."
  "Thank him and say it will be done as he
wishes."
  Tyrer obeyed. Yoshi waved Abeh forward.
"Ikimasho!" They trotted off, the
porters and groom trailing.
  "You all set, George?"'
  "Yes, thanks, Sir William."
  "Off you go then. Phillip, you did well
today, a few more conferences like this and I will recommend
you be upgraded to full interpreter."
  "Thank you, sir. May I be present when
you see Nakama?"'
  He had almost lost his temper. "How the
devil can that happen when you're going to Yedo with
George. Use your brains! George, give
him an emetic, the poor lad's witless!"
  Babcott said, "I don't really need
Phillip. I thought it might be important for
him to meet this "unnamed person.""
  "You were quite right, this meeting could be very
important--Nakama, or Hiraga, whatever
his name, isn't. Phillip, has that got through to you
yet?"'
  "Yes sir, sorry sir."
  Babcott leaned closer. "It might be a
good idea not to hand over Nakama until we get
back, just in case."
  Sir William had looked up at him, this
thought jumping the medical consultation to a
possible new level. "You mean they might try
to keep you? As a hostage? Both of you?"'
  Babcott shrugged. "Nakama's
important to him. No harm in being wise,
eh?"'
  Sir William frowned. "I'll expect
you back tomorrow." He had waited until they were out
of sight and then went back to the conference room.
  At once the Admiral exploded, "Never
heard so much poppycock in my life! Build
them a navy? Have you taken leave of your
senses?"'
  "That's not up to us, my dear Admiral,"
he had said calmly, "that would be up
to Parliament."
  "Or much more likely Emperor
Napoleon," Seratard interrupted sharply.
  "I doubt that, my dear sir," Ketterer
said, his face and neck puce. "Foreign naval
matters are the prime concern of the Royal Navy
and any French interference in areas of British
influence will be dealt with right smartly."
  "Quite right," Sir William said loudly,
overriding both of them as Seratard's face
matched the Admiral's and he volubly began
to disagree. "In any event it would be a
political decision. For London and
Paris."
  "Political be damned," the Admiral
said, jowls shaking with rage. "A dozen of our
best warships in the hands of those scallywags when you
see what they can do with a couple of swords? I'm
totally opposed!"
  "So am I," Sir William said
smoothly, "totally, and will so recommend."
  "What?"'
  "I totally agree with you. Such a major
decision is entirely up to the Admiralty,
assisted by the Foreign Office. Paris
likewise. Not a thing we can do but report to our
superiors. You should do likewise. Thank God
Japanese authorities at long last
approve our right to proceed against guilty parties
ourselves. Don't you agree, Admiral?"'
  "If you're talking about your proposed,
ill-advised punitive strike, here, there or
anywhere, it's not yet approved by the Admiralty
so it's not approved by me. I suggest we go
back aboard Pearl before the rain starts ..."
  Sir William sighed and looked out
of a wardroom porthole. The rain had stopped
temporarily, the sea was still leaden but his spirit
wasn't. He had the indemnity money, there was no
immediate need now to flatten Yedo and through this Yoshi
we'll help modernize Japan, he thought.
We'll make a happy place for it in the
family of nations, happy for them as well as us.
Far better we do it and instill British
virtues than the French implant French ones,
though their wines and attitudes to food and fornication
are far superior to ours.
  Yes. Except in fornication the Japanese will
benefit. In that their attitude is without doubt
superior. Pity we can't import that into our
society but the Queen would never stand for it.
Dreadful shame, but that's life. We'll just have
to bless our luck to be living here--once we've
civilized them. "Henri, let's get some
air."
  He was glad to be back on deck. The wind
was sea salt heavy, sharp and wholesome, the
frigate under sail now, making way nicely.
Marlowe was on the bridge--officers and men on
deck or in the shrouds achingly aware of the
Admiral who sat in the bridge sea chair,
sourly hunched into his greatcoat. "For God's
sake, Marlowe, take her closer to the wind."
  "Aye aye, sir."
  Sir William was not an expert but that seemed
to be a pedantic and unnecessary order. Bloody
man! Still, can't blame him for wanting confirming
orders, it's his neck if anything goes wrong.
  When the frigate swung on to a new tack his
grip tightened on the gunnel. He loved the
sea and being on it, particularly on the deck of a
British warship, proud that the ships of Empire
possessed the sea as much as any ships could rule
the waves. Ketterer's right about not wanting
to create another navy, he thought, not with these men--
the French, American and Prussian navies
are enough trouble as it is.
  He looked aft.
  Aft, over the horizon, was Yedo. Yedo and
Yoshi spell trouble whichever way you look at
it, whatever the rosy future he promised.
Ahead was Yokohama. More trouble there but never
mind, tonight Angelique's my dinner partner--
I'm glad she didn't leave but still don't
understand why. Doesn't that play even more into Tess
Struan's hands?
  Strange to think of Angelique without
Malcolm Struan. Sorry he had such bad
luck but he's gone and we're alive and he
isn't. Joss. Who'll be tai-pan now? Young
Duncan's only ten, last of the Struan boys.
Terrible for Tess, more tragedy to bear. Wouldn't
be surprised if this didn't finish her. Always
admired her for her courage, carrying the load of
Culum and the Brocks, not to mention Dirk
Struan.
  Well, I did my best for Tess, and for
Malcolm--alive and dead. And for Angelique.
When she leaves there'll be an emptiness that
won't be filled easily. Hope she regains
the youth she's lost, that's another sadness but she's
got a whole life in front of her--if she
has his child or if she doesn't. Betting's still
evens.
  Commands on the bridge attracted his attention
for a moment but it was nothing urgent, just adding more
sail. The wind was humming the shrouds. The
frigate picked up speed. Their moorings were under
an hour away. Sunset a good two hours.
Plenty of time to bring Nakama to heel before
dinner.

  Sunset was just a lowering of light, the sun dying
behind a blanket of clouds, regretting the loss
of the day.
  Hiraga said to the group of fishermen, "That
boat will do--no fishing tackle, but oars and sail
are included." He was on the beach near Drunk
Town and he paid the owner what had been asked without
bargaining, still unwilling to lose face
by negotiating though he knew now--too well
hammered into him by Mukfey--that he was being cheated and
overcharged and that this man and his compatriots would
laugh at him as soon as they were out of sight. He
knew he was to blame because he was dressed like a
gai-jin and not properly with swords.
  Half of him wanted to scream and lash out at
their bad manners and have them crawling on the beach,
begging for the privilege of giving him the boat. The
other half counselled patience: You have done what
you must do, the boat is yours, tomorrow you die with
honor in the cause of sonno-joi, these lice
have no more value than the barnacles on the filthy
little vessel they sell.
  "Leave everything in the boat," he said.
Unctuously the owner bowed and
grovelled his way out of range, then, with his
comrades, walked away, blessing their luck for a
double profit.
  The boat was an ordinary little fishing boat for
one to three men with a small sail and single stern
oar. Part of samurai training was the use of
boats on short distances to traverse rivers or
to reach offshore coastal ships or galleys, so
they could all handle it. The news that he had bought
one would fly around the village but that did not
matter. By the time the shoya and others had worked out
its probable use, the revelation would be too
late.
  Satisfied the boat was safe, he began
to walk through Drunk Town, through the crowded
alleys, stepping over drunks and garbage,
disgusted with the filth. Taira says his London
is the cleanest, biggest wealthiest city in the world
but I do not believe him--not if so many of his kind
live like this, with the rest of the Settlement not much
better. Taking a shortcut he crossed into a
smaller alley. Men passed by, beggars held
their hands out, eyes peered suspiciously from
doorways but no one bothered him.
  No Man's Land was as always, weed-covered and
stinking, the main refuse dump of the Settlement.
A few ragged scavengers raked through the latest
pile of trash. They glanced at him briefly.
His eyes went to the rickety well head. The
broken wooden cover that hid the secret
passage to the Yoshiwara seemed untouched.
Ori's face fleetingly came from his memory
and the time they were below, when he was ready to kill him and
Ori had thrown, pretended to throw, the golden
cross into the depths. Ori was baka to waste his
life over that woman. We could use him tomorrow.
He shoved Ori out of his mind.
  Now his whole being was committed to the attack.
All reasoning against it had vanished. There was a
consensus, Akimoto gleefully in favor,
Takeda, and the Sensei. Therefore he was also. The
boat was ready. Now he would collect
Akimoto and they would go back and finalize the
plan. In reality he was glad. He would die in
a blaze of glory doing the Emperor's wishes.
What more could a samurai desire from life?
  With the suddenness of an ice bath he was shocked from
euphoria and disappeared into a doorway. Three
Redcoats stood outside the shoya's house,
two more were emerging from the nearby hovel
he and Akimoto rented. Akimoto was between them,
calling out at the top of his voice one of the few
English phrases he had learned: "So sorry,
no 'unnerstan Nakama!"
  "Not-a-knowledge-a-more-a," the Sergeant said slowly and
loudly. "Where is he?" Then louder, "Where
Nakama?"
  "Nakama?" Akimoto's voice itself was
loud, clearly trying to warn him if he happened
to be within hearing. "Nakama no 'unnerstan so
sorry," then in Japanese, "Someone's
betrayed someone," then in guttural English again,
"Nakama no unner--"
  "Shut up!" the Sergeant said angrily,
"Corporal, this fool knows nothing. Butcher, you
and Swallow stay here until Mister bloody
Nakama comes back and ask him--ask him nice
like to come along wiv you to see Sir Will'm but
make sure you bring the bugger. You," he stabbed a
rough, iron-hard finger in Akimoto's chest, "you
come along wiv me in case the Guv wants you."
Loudly protesting in Japanese he went with
them, then in English, "Nakama, no
'unnerstan," over and over.
  When Hiraga had recovered, and it was safe
he slipped out of the doorway, jumped a fence and
hurried back to No Man's Land. There he
ducked down into the doorway, not safe yet to run
for the well, too much light, the three scavengers
too near, too malevolent. Must keep it
secret.
  Who has betrayed us?
  No time to think about that now. He went deeper
into the shadows as one of the scavengers moved nearer,
muttering and cursing at the smallness of the pickings,
a grubby sack in one hand. All three were
skeletal and filthy. One came close to the
opening but passed without noticing him. In half an
hour light would be gone, nothing to do but to wait.
Suddenly the doorway was blocked.
  "Thort I didn't see you eh? Wot'cher
doin?" the scavenger rasped, heavy with menace.
  Slowly Hiraga straightened. His hand was on
the small pistol in his pocket. Then he saw the
knife appear in the clawlike fist and the man
thrust forward viciously. But Hiraga was faster
and caught the hand and chopped at the scavenger's
throat. He squealed like a gutted pig and went
down. At once the other two looked up and
hurried to investigate.
  They skidded to a stop. Now Hiraga was in the
doorway, the gun in one hand, knife in the other
and he stood over the man who writhed, choking in the
dirt. Knives came out and the two men
attacked. Hiraga did not hesitate and
lunged at one man who darted away, leaving him
the opening he needed. He was through the slot quickly,
running for Drunk Town, not wanting to waste time
fighting. In moments he had reached a side
street but in his haste his hat had fallen off.
He looked back and saw one of the scavengers had
grabbed it up with a shout. In seconds the other had
a hand on it too and they began a cursing fight for
possession.
  Chest heaving, Hiraga left them to it.
Another look at the sky. Be patient. When
they've gone you can go to the well. You must not reveal
it, it's essential for the attack. Be patient.
Buy a hat or a cap. What's gone wrong?

  "Well, where the devil has he gone?"
  "Can't be far, Sir William," Pallidar
said. "I've men at both gates and on the
bridge into the Yoshiwara. He's probably in
one of the Inns. A matter of time before he
appears. You want him in irons?"
  "No, just here, unarmed, under guard."
  "What about this fellow?"
  Akimoto was sitting, his back to the wall, a
soldier nearby. He had already been searched.
  "I'll decide that when I've talked to him.
Ah, Andr`e, come in. Settry, no need for you
to wait. I'm dining with the Russian Minister, when
you've got Nakama come and fetch me."
Pallidar saluted and went out. "Andr`e, sorry
to bother you but we can't find Nakama. As
Phillip's not here could you interpret for me, ask
this fellow where he is?"
  He watched while Andr`e began questioning
Akimoto, trying to contain his irritation and wishing
Phillip Tyrer was here and not with Babcott.
Hope that goes well. Damn it, if
Nakama's not caught Yoshi will be irritable
indeed, rightly so.
  "He says he doesn't know," Andr`e said.
He had not taken off his topcoat. Sir
William's office was always freezing even on the
coldest day, his coal fire mean. "He seems
dim-witted, mumbles Nakama who, Nakama
could be anywhere, the Yoshiwara, perhaps
Kanagawa."
  "Eh?" Sir William was shocked. "He's
not supposed to leave the Settlement without my
express approval. Ask him ... ask him
when did Nakama leave?"
  "He says he doesn't know, doesn't know
Nakama, if he's left or where he is,
doesn't know anything."
  "Perhaps a night in the brig will refresh his
memory. Corporal!" The door opened at
once. "Put this man in the brig overnight, or
until I give orders to the contrary. He is
to be well treated, understand?"
  "Yessir."
  "He is to be well treated."
  "Yessir." The Corporal jerked a thumb
at Akimoto who backed out of the room bowing. The
brig, used for rowdies, and servicemen subject
to military discipline, was down the street, a low
brick building with a dozen cells, flogging
triangle. After the Club, it had been the
second structure built, a normal
British custom for most Settlements.
  "Merci, Andr`e."
  "De rien."
  "Have you any idea where he could be?"
  "No, Monsieur, other than what the man
said. See you at dinner." Andr`e smiled and
left and began walking down the High Street, the
wind whipping the leaves and papers and debris. Not
much light was left in the sky.
  Glad we're not responsible for finding him,
he thought. Where would he have gone? If he has
any sense to Ky@oto or Nagasaki, or stowed
away on yesterday's merchantman to Shanghai
if he knows Yoshi wants him. Surely he
must have known--no secrets in the Bakufu, or
here. Great meeting, good for us too for we have the
edge with Yoshi but damn Phillip, he's
getting too good. Surely the patient will be
Anjo. He spat irritably. I should have had
the chance--after all it was my idea, Raiko and
Meikin must have planted the thought somehow. Mon
Dieu, they've more power than I imagined.
  An icy current went through him. Raiko had
asked him to see her urgently tonight. What now?
Had to be trouble.
  "Evening, sir," the Struan guard on the
front door said.
  "I've an appointment with Madame
Struan."
  "Yes sir. She's expecting you, in the
tai-pan's office along the corridor.
Excuse the mess in the hall, sir, but Mr.
McFay's packing. Terrible, he's going,
isn't it?"
  "Yes, but let's hope th--" The signal
gun at the Harbor Master's cut him off.
Astonished, both men glanced seawards for no ship
was expected or overdue. Movement on the
crowded High Street stopped and then a murmur
of excitement went through Yokohama. Rounding the
distant headland was a clipper, all sails set
and the bit between her teeth. They saw puffs of
smoke from her cannonade salute to the
flagship, then heard the following boom and the
flagship's answer.
  Too far distant to see her flag. "She's
one of ours," the guard said proudly. "Has
to be, like in the old days ... oh, evening, sir."
  Jamie McFay came out of the door fast and
focused his binoculars. "Hello, Andr`e, just
want to make sure ... Prancing Cloud!
Hallelujah!" The implications would be clear
to everyone. She had been scheduled to sail on
to London. Returning here, and so quickly, meant
she carried urgent news--or passengers. Good
or bad.
  "Hallelujah," Andr`e echoed. He saw
Seratard with a telescope on the steps of the
French Legation, Sir William at his window
with binoculars, and next door, Dmitri stood
at Brock's entrance, a short telescope
to his eye. As Dmitri lowered it he noticed
Jamie, hesitated, then gave him a
thumbs-up. Jamie waved back then
refocused. The clipper was beautiful charging for
her moorings.
  Andr`e said softly, "Perhaps she's aboard?"
  "I had the same thought. We'll soon find
out."
  "Signal her."
  "By the time I get the Harbor Master to put
up the flags the light will have gone. Anyway it's
not up to me now, that's Mr. MacStruan's
decision." Jamie looked at him. "We'll
know soon enough. You're seeing Angelique?"
  "Yes."
  "No need to worry her, until we know.
Eh?"
  "I agree, mon brave." Andr`e looked
back at the clipper. "You'll meet her?"
  "The ship?" The same hard smile. "Wouldn't
you?"
  They went into the foyer together. Coming down the
staircase was Albert MacStruan, half
dressed in evening clothes, tie undone but
elegant. "Prancing Cloud?"
  "Yes," Jamie said.
  "Thought so." The strange eyes narrowed.
"'evening, Andr`e. How are you?" MacStruan
said.
  "Fine, thank you. See you later."
  Jamie waited until Andr`e had knocked and
gone into the tai-pan's office that was now
MacStruan's. "You'll meet her?"
  "Oh yes." MacStruan walked down the
last step but now the bounce gone from his stride.
"Please join me."
  "Thanks, but that's your privilege now.
I've sent Vargas for the Bosun, the launch will
be ready in five minutes."
  MacStruan said kindly, "Come aboard with
me, meet the ship like you used to, should still be
doing."
  "No, time to move on, it's all yours now.
But thanks."
  "I hear Zergeyev's banquet tonight will be
grand as Angelique's accepted. Change your
mind, join the party."
  "Can't, not tonight, I'm still not finished packing."
Jamie smiled at him, then motioned down the
corridor. "Angelique cleared using your
office with you?"
  "Oh yes, glad to oblige, and better than
having visitors upstairs in her suite,
especially him. Can't say I like him."
  "Andr`e's all right, his music is the best,
certainly the best we have here. Hope Prancing
Cloud's news is good."
  "Me too. But I doubt it. Do you think
Tess is aboard?"
  "The thought had occurred to me." Jamie
grinned, no longer her servant. "It would
explain Cloud's changed schedule. That's what
Dirk would have done."
  "She's not Dirk, she's much more cunning--
more's the pity, my dear fellow." There was no
love lost between the stepbrothers and Tess
Struan, but a codicil in Dirk's
will had laid down that should the two boys prove
themselves in schools and scholarship, they were to be used
in the Noble House the limit of their ability.
Both were smart, their connections with highly placed
Etonian and university friends scattered throughout the
gentry, the City and in Parliament where his
stepbrother, Frederick, had just won a seat,
made them even more valuable. Even so both knew
Tess Struan would dismiss them, but for the
codicil. "Hope she hasn't come a-visiting
--that's a boring thought."
  McFay laughed. "We'll just batten down the
hatches."

  "Hello Andr`e."
  "'evening, Angelique."
  She was in her favorite chair near the bay
window, the curtains open to the harbor.
"Prancing Cloud?"
  "Yes."
  "Good. Is she aboard?"
  Andr`e smiled crookedly. "It would explain
the clipper."
  "It doesn't matter either way," she said
evenly but her stomach was twisting. "Would you like a
drink?"
  "Thanks." He saw the bottle of
champagne opened in its bucket of ice and a
half-full glass on the table. "May I?"
  "Please."
  It was becoming her custom to watch the sun go
down, or the gloaming and the night arrive, with
champagne. Just one glass to prepare for the long
evening and then the long night. Her sleep pattern
had changed. She no longer put her head on the
pillow and drifted off to wake at dawn. Now
sleep eluded her. At first she had been frightened
but Babcott had convinced her that fear only made
insomnia worse, "We don't need eight or
ten hours so don't worry. Use the time to your
profit. Write letters or your journal and think
good thoughts--and don't worry ..."

Dearest Colette,

she had written yesterday,

his advice works but he missed the best
opportunity and that is TO PLAN, so
important because that woman is plotting
my downfall.
  God willing, I will be in Paris soon when
I can tell you all. Sometimes it's almost as though
my life here is a play, or a Victor
Hugo story, and Malcolm, poor man, never
existed. But I enjoy the quiet, am content with the
waiting. Only a few more days, and then I will know
about the child, if it is to be or not. I so hope and
hope and hope and pray and pray and pray I
carry his child--and also that your birthing will be smooth, and
give you another boy.
  I have to be wise. I've only myself
to rely on, here. Jamie is a good friend but he
cannot help much--he's no longer with the Noble House
and this newcomer, Albert MacStruan is kind,
a perfect gentleman, highborn British, and
tolerates me only for the moment--until SHE
orders otherwise. Sir William? He's
government, British Government. Seratard?
God knows if he'll truly help, but it will
only be for what use I can be to him. Mr.
Skye? He does his best but everyone hates
him. Andr`e? He's too clever and knows too
much, and I believe the trap he's in is driving
him mad (i can't wait to hear what YOU
THINK!!!) My only hope is Edward
Gornt. He will have arrived Hong Kong and will have
seen her by now. My prayers, and I know yours, for
his success are abundant and daily.
  So I use my night waking time to plan.
Now I've so many good plans and thoughts how to deal
with every possible contingency--and plenty of strength
to deal with the ones I haven't dared consider, for
example if Edward fails me or, God
forbid, he never arrives--there are rumours of
terrible storms in the China seas, normal at this
time of the year. Poor Dmitri's
Cooper-Tillman lost another merchantman.
Poor sailors, how terrible the sea is and how
brave the men who sail her.
  Andr`e, says, rightly, I cannot leave here
nor make a move until SHE declares herself.
I am Malcolm's widow, everyone says so,
Mr. Skye has registered all sorts of
papers with Sir William and has sent more
to Hong Kong and more to London. I have enough money and
can stay here as long as I want--Albert
MacStruan has said I can use Jamie's
office when it is vacant and I have ten more chits
that Malcolm chopped for me but left the
amount blank--wasn't that thoughtful--that Jamie and
now Albert have agreed to honor, up to a hundred
guineas each.
  When SHE declares herself I will join battle
with her. I feel it will be to the death but I assure
you, darling Colette, it won't be mine--this will be
her Waterloo, not mine, France will be revenged.
I feel very strong, very fit ...

  She was watching Andr`e, waiting for him to begin.
His face was hard, the skin pale and stretched, and
he was thinner. The first glass had been gulped.
And the second. Now he sipped the third.
"You're more beautiful than ever."
  "Thank you. Your Hinodeh, how is she?"
  "More beautiful than ever."
  "If you love her so much, Andr`e, why do your
lips tighten and your eyes pop out with rage when
I mention her name--you said it was all right to ask about
her." A few days ago he had told her about
their agreement. Part, not all. It had burst out
when despair had overwhelmed him. "If you're so
adamant about not making love in the dark and the huge
price this Raiko demanded why did you agree in
the first place?"
  "I ... it was necessary," he said, not looking at
her. He could not tell her the real reason--it had
been enough to see Seratard's lips curl and see
him avoid making contact ever since, careful never
to use the same eating utensils or glass even
though it was only caught from a woman or a man
--wasn't it? "I just took one look at her
and, mon Dieu, don't you understand what love
is, how ..." The words died away. He poured
another glass, the bottle almost empty now.
"You cannot believe how crushingly desirable she was
that once." He gulped the wine. "Sorry, I
need money."
  "Of course. But I have only a little left."
  "You have paper, with his chop."
  "Oh?"
  His smile was, if anything, more crooked.
"Fortunately shroffs talk to shroffs, clerks
to clerks. Fill in another tomorrow. Please.
Five hundred Mex."
  "That's too much."
  "Not half enough, ch@erie," he said, his
voice barely audible. He got up and closed
the curtains to the last of the sunset, then turned
up the oil lamp that was on the table and
reached for the bottle. The dregs went into his
glass, and then he slammed the bottle back in
its ice bucket. "Do you think I like doing this
to you? You think I don't know it's blackmail?
Don't worry, I'm reasonable, I only
want what you can presently afford. A hundred
Mex, or the guinea equivalent tonight, two
hundred tomorrow, a hundred the next."
  "That's not possible."
  "Everything's possible." He took an
envelope out of his pocket. The envelope contained
a single sheet of paper that he unfolded
carefully. Dozens of shreds of green paper were
pasted meticulously on it to complete a perfect
jigsaw. He laid it on the table, well out of
her reach. At once she recognized her father's
handwriting. The second page that she had seen
Andr`e tear up so long ago.
  "Can you read it from there?" he asked softly.
  "No."
  "Your loving father wrote, he signed and dated
it, "and hope, as we discussed, that you will arrange
an early betrothal and marriage by whatever means
you can. It's important for our future.
Struan will permanently solve Richaud
Fr@eres. Never mind th--"'"
  "Never mind, Andr`e," she said as softly, no
need now to disguise the venom. "The words are
indelibly written on my brain. Indelibly.
Am I buying it, or is it a permanent
threat?"
  "It's an insurance," he said, folding it and
replacing it with care. "Now it goes back to a
safe place, with details of the Affair
Angelique, in case anything nasty happens
to me."
  Abruptly she laughed, unbalancing him.
"Oh Andr`e, do you think I'd try to murder you?
Me?"
  "It would wreck any financial arrangement
Tess might offer, may be forced to offer, and put
you in the dock."
  "How silly you are." She picked up her
glass and sipped her champagne and he noticed,
disquieted, how steady her hand was. She was
watching him placidly, thinking how foolish he
was, foolish to let her know he had done what
he had done and was a total cheat, but even more
foolish to rile against Hinodeh for preferring the
dark--perhaps he looks awful naked--and
more foolish to scream about the price he paid because
both are insignificant if she's everything he
says she is. "I'd like to meet this Hinodeh.
Please arrange it."
  "Eh?"
  Amused at his expression, she said, "What's
so strange about that? I have an interest in her,
I'm financing her, the love of your life.
Yes?"
  Shakily he got up and went to the sideboard
and poured brandy. "Would you like some?"
  "No, thank you." Only her eyes had
moved.
  Again he sat opposite her. A draft
played with the flame and made her eyes glitter.
"A hundred. Please."
  "When do I stop paying, Andr`e?" she asked
pleasantly.
  The brandy tasted better than the wine. He
faced that question. "When she's paid for, before you leave."
  "Before I leave? You mean I can't leave
until then?"
  "When she's paid for, before you leave."
  She frowned and went over to the desk and opened a
side drawer. The little purse contained the
equivalent of about two hundred Mex in gold
oban. "And if there's no money?"
  "It will come from Tess, there's no other way.
She'll pay, somehow we'll make that happen."
  ""We" will?"
  "I promised," he said, the whites of his
eyes bloodshot. "Your future is my
future. At least on that we both agree."
  She opened the purse and counted half. Then, not
knowing why, put them all back and handed it to him.
"There's about two hundred Mex there," she said,
smiling strangely. "On account."
  "I wished I understood you. I used to."
  "Then I was a silly young girl. Now I'm
not."
  He nodded slowly. Then took out the envelope
and held it to the flame. She let out a little gasp
as the corner caught and then it flared and he put it
into an ashtray and together they watched it curl and
twist and die. He crushed the ash with the bottom of
his glass.
  "Why?" she asked.
  "Because you understand about Hinodeh. And like it or not
we're partners. If Tess doesn't pay you
I'm a dead man." He stuck out his
hand. "Peace?"
  She put her hand in his and smiled. "Peace.
Thank you."
  He got up. "I'd better check on
Prancing Cloud. If Tess's aboard, it
will speed things up."
  After he had gone she sifted the ashes but not a
single word could be seen. Easy for Andr`e to forge a
copy and tear it up and present it as the original
and burn it--and still have the restored original
secreted away for later use. That's just the kind
of stratagem he would adore. Why burn the
false one? To make me trust him further,
to forgive the blackmail.
  Peace? The only peace from a blackmailer
is when the deadly exposure he threatens you with
no longer needs to be hidden. In my case that's
when SHE has paid, and the money banked. And after
Andr`e gets what he wants--Hinodeh, perhaps.
What is it she wants? She hides from him in the
dark. Why? Because of his color? To titillate?
For revenge? Because he's not Japanese?
  I know now that the act of love can go from terror
to ecstasy to delusion, with every variation in between. My
first time with Malcolm was in the light, the second
in darktime and both were beautiful. With him of the other
life always in the light and he was beautiful and
deadly, his color beautiful, everything beautiful
and deadly and terrifying and blindingly powerful,
nothing like my husband Malcolm whom I truly
loved. And honored--and honor still, and will forever.
  Her sharp ear caught the toot of the cutter's
steam whistle. She opened the curtains and saw the
launch hurrying away from their jetty, port and
starboard lights clear, Albert MacStruan in
the cabin. In the roads Prancing Cloud was
scarcely visible, downing sails and easing for
moorings.
  Her mind swirled aboard and in her mind she
saw her enemy--as ever, thin-lipped, pale-eyed,
tall and stiff-backed, bony and badly dressed
--then sped away to the outer harbor and
Malcolm's burial and she smiled, glorying in
that victory, the sound of her heart pulsing in her
ears. Then she curled up in her chair again--
his chair, their chair, another victory--and
watched the dark become darker, only riding
lights to be seen, hardly able to contain her
excitement.
  Surely Edward would be aboard.

                 

  The door to Jamie's office swung open and
Vargas rushed in, out of breath, "Launch's
left Cloud, senhor," he said, his heavy
street clothes still on, hat and head scarf
wrapped around his face, telescope in hand,
"four or five passengers."
  "Is she aboard?" Jamie did not look up
from the packing case he was filling with papers. When
there was no immediate answer his voice edged, "Damn
it, is she aboard?"
  "I ... I'm ... I think so."
  "I said to let me know when you were sure, not
before!"
  "I'm, I'm sorry, senhor, I was at the
end of the jetty and looked through the spyglass and
thought I'd better report and ask what, what
I should do."
  "Go back and meet her, but first make sure
all servants are ready, make sure there's a
fire in the tai-pan's suite, she'll take
that, Mr. MacStruan's sure to move out."
  "But that will mean she'll be next door to Mrs.
Angeli--"
  "I know that for God's sake but that's the
tai-pan's suite and that's the one she'll have!"
  Vargas fled. Unable to resist, Jamie
hurried to the window. The cutter was nearing shore.
Just riding lights outside and dancing in the chop.
He focused his binoculars. Vague shapes in
the cabin but positively one a woman. No
doubt about the bonnet, and no mistaking her
tall, erect carriage and the way she rode the
pitch and toss and tilt of the boat.
  "Shit!" The breath sighed out of his mouth.
To steady the image, he leaned against the window. Not
much better. One of the shapes he identified as
Captain Strongbow more by his height and bulk
than anything else. Two other men, no three--
one of them MacStruan.
  The cutter came in fast, the storm damage
on the prow still easy to see, not yet completely
repaired. Curious bystanders waited under the
swinging lantern on the dock, everyone muffled against
the dreaded winter flux with hats and head scarfs that
were now obligatory. Difficult to see faces
but he thought he recognized Andr`e there, and ...
ah yes Vervene, Heavenly and, yes,
and Nettlesmith. The vultures gathering, he
thought, though like me, the main ones are watching from their
windows.
  Tonight the dark oppressed him. In his room his
fire was good but now seemed to have lost its warmth.
His throat felt tight and his chest hurt.
Control yourself, he thought. She's not your problem.
  Captain Strongbow was first onto the wharf in his
heavy sea coat. Still difficult to see clearly
but no mistaking him. Then, ah yes,
MacStruan. They turned and helped her up.
She was wrapped against the cold, stiff-backed,
dark clothes, dark bonnet tied with the inevitable
heavy scarf. Her size. Shit!
  The other two passengers climbed onto the
jetty. He recognized them. A moment's
hesitation then he went out and along the passage
to the tai-pan's office. Angelique was peering
into the dark through a crack in the curtain, her fire
glowing nicely, lamps lit and the room cozy.
"Ah, Jamie. I can't see them clearly.
Is she there?"
  "'afraid so, yes." He saw no change in
her expression. "Here." He offered her the
binoculars. "I thought you might like these."
  "No need for me to look, or be afraid,
Jamie. Who else?" Her voice was the thinnest
it had ever been. "Who's with her?"
  "Strongbow, Hoag and Gornt."
  She turned back to the window to hide but for an
instant he had seen the joy that flooded her
face. Never mind if Jamie saw, she was
thinking, dizzy with excitement. That woman and
Edward together? The two of them together, Hoag as
well! Doesn't that portend success,
Edward's success, that he convinced her? "I'll
be upstairs, dressing for dinner. If anyone
wants to see me, I'll come down again.
Thanks, dear Jamie." Impulsively, she
hugged him. And left.
  He stared after her. Why the joy? If Tess
is with Hoag, the heavy guns have arrived.
Haven't they?
  He went back to his office perplexed,
leaving the door ajar, and continued to pack papers and
books, his fingers doing the work, his mind elsewhere:
on Tess, the future, the shoya, Nemi tonight,
the Noble House that he had given twenty years
to-- Be honest, you don't really want to leave
and know it's a bad time to go out on your
own--thinking about Angelique's grim future,
tomorrow's meeting with the Swiss Minister and possible
imports from their armament-watch factories, all
mixed with the news of the incredible Yoshi meeting,
Babcott and Tyrer now in Yedo, the bullion
the Bakufu had advanced already counted and accurate
--and about Nakama, poor fellow.
  Poor fellow? He's an assassin, the
worst kind. I never felt that, never once did
I feel threatened. He must be in Drunk Town
or somewhere in the Yoshiwara. If the news flashed
to us, someone must have whispered to him and he fled.
Damn it! Now I'll have to cut Tyrer in or
Johann ...
  Voices in the foyer broke into his revery.
A polyglot of voices: MacStruan,
Vargas, Hoag, servants bustling around.
  No need to greet them. I'll be summoned
soon enough. Depressed, he continued with his work,
almost done now.
  "Jamie!"
  He looked around. And was paralyzed.
Maureen. His Maureen in the doorway!
Maureen Ross. Navy blue winter bonnet,
blue eyes peeping out above the folds of her
heavy woolen head scarf. Navy blue
topcoat over a dark blue dress. Maureen
Ross, twenty-eight. Tall, a fraction
taller than Tess--the average height nowadays
a little over five feet, Queen Victoria
four feet eleven. "Christ-almighty," he
said, voice strangled, mind gone.
  "Hello to you, Jamie McFay." She
stayed in the doorway, standing straight like her father,
her voice lilting. "Can I come in please?"
She unwound the scarf and smiled tentatively.
  Now he could see her. Same clear face, not
pretty but strong and curiously appealing, hazel
freckles, and just as he had last seen her just over
three years ago--the dock at Glasgow--though
then there were tears at their parting. He had forgotten
how her eyes ... "Hello Sparkles," he
muttered without thinking, using his nickname for her.
"Jesus Christ ... Maureen?"
  Her laugh trilled. "I take that as a yes
and you'll no' be blaspheming anymore, laddie.
Once is fair, me coming like a wraith from the
night wanting to surprise you." Her smile and the
lilt to her voice made her more attractive
than she really was, and the light that
danced in her eyes and the love that she wore like a
shield. She closed the door and looked at him
again. "You look grand, Jamie, a little tired, but
you're as bonny as ever."
  He had straightened up but still stood behind the
desk, his mind jumbled with My God it's you, not
Tess, it's you, easy to mistake in the dark,
almost same height same stiff back--
remembering his halfhearted, negative letters over
the last year and the final one breaking their engagement,
his soundless voice saying, Sorry, Maureen,
I wrote you, we're not getting married,
sorry, don't want to get married, can't now,
now that I'm on my own, worst possible time and
why didn't ...
  "Och, Jamie," she was saying from across the
room, watching and waiting, her smile deepening,
"you canna know how happy I am to see you, to be
here at last, aye, the adventures I've had will
fill a volume." When he didn't move or
reply, a small frown wrinkled her forehead.
"Will you no' get your wits about you, laddie?"
  "Tess!" he croaked. "I, we thought you were
Tess Struan."
  "Mrs. Struan? No, she's in Hong
Kong. Such a lady, she arranged for me to come
here, didn't charge me a penny piece. "You
go see your Jamie McFay with my
compliments," she said and introduced me
to Captain Strongbow--who gave me a cabin
to mysel'--and to fine Dr. Hoag and Mister
Smartypants Gornt."
  "Eh?"
  "That laddie thinks he's God's gift
to womanhood but not to me. I'm affianced, I
told him, affianced before God to Mr. Jamie
McFay. He said he was your friend, Jamie, and
Dr. Hoag told me he saved your life so
I was nice but kept a distance. Och, laddie,
there's so much to learn, so much to tell."
  "Christ," he muttered, not hearing her, "easy
to make the mistake with the scarf around your face, you
and Tess're both the same size, stand the same
way ..."
  "Huh!" Maureen said, her eyes suddenly
fiery, "I'll thank you no' to take the Lord's
name in vain, and she's a mite shorter and much
thicker and much older and her hair is grey,
mine's brown and even in the dark I'm not like her!"
When her sudden smile at her own
pleasantry did not get through to him, she sighed.
Exasperated, she looked around the room. She
saw the decanter. At once went over to it,
sniffed to make sure it was whisky, crinkled her
nose with distaste but poured him a glass, and a
dribble in another.
  "Here," she looked up at him, close for the
first time, a sudden beam covering her. "My Da'
always needed a wusky when the shock of Scotland
being part of the British Isles hit him."
  The spell broke. Jamie laughed and took
her in his arms and hugged her, welcoming her, and the
glasses almost spilled out of her hand, "Watch
it, laddie," she gasped, managed to put them
down and hugged him desperately--all the waiting
and standing there, seeing his shock and not the welcome
she'd hoped for, trying to be strong and adult, not
knowing what to do or how to say that she loved him and
could not bear the thought of losing him so she had
gambled, gambled and left her sanctuary, she had
put her trust in God, took her prayerbook
and Bible and her father's derringer in her purse and
set out blindly on ten thousand miles of fear.
Inside. But not outside--oh no, never, that's not
the Ross way!
  "Och, Jamie laddie, laddie ..."
  "It's all right," he murmured, wishing her
trembles away.
  In time the shuddering stopped and she released herself,
untied her bonnet and let her long plait of
red-brown hair uncoil. "That's better," she
said. "You're a bonny man, thank you." She
handed him his glass and took hers and touched
glasses. "Scotland forever," she said as a toast
and sipped. "That tastes dreadful, Jamie, but
I'm powerful pleased to see you, I canna say
it any better."
  Her smile was more tentative now, some of her
confidence gone. His embrace had been like a
brother's, not a lover's, oh God oh God
oh God. To hide from him she looked around as she
took off her coat and gloves. Her dress was
warm and well cut, another shade of blue and
showed off her curves and hourglass waist. "Your
Mr. MacStruan says you can use your suite
and I can have the rooms next door until we have
a place of our own. Have you packed up your
rooms yet, Jamie?"
  "No, not yet." Confused, not knowing how to start
but start he must. Soon. "This ...
all my papers and books were first, I was starting
upstairs tomorrow. Everything, the furniture here and
upstairs belongs to Struan's."
  "Never mind. We can buy our own." She sat
in the chair opposite the desk and looked at
him. Hands in her lap. Waiting. Sure that now
she had to bite her tongue and wait for him to begin.
She had done her part by arriving. Perhaps done too
much, arriving unannounced, but she had thought about that
carefully and done the best she could by writing the letter,
and had imagined this meeting hour after hour in the
nauseating months at sea, during the storms and
once, in the China seas off Singapore, during a
mutiny of Chinese steerage passengers,
pirates amongst them, that had been put down
bloodily. Jamie was her lodestar and now the time
of reckoning had arrived.
  "He's a bad man, this Jamie
McFay," her mother had told her when she
announced her decision. "I've said it and said
it, and he'll do you no good, lassie. His letters
are anything but encouraging, just the reverse."
  "I mean to go, Ma darling. Will Da' lend
me the money?"'
  "Aye, if you ask him."
  "I mean to go. I must. I'm twenty-eight.
I'm old. Past normal marriage age.
I've waited so long and would wait another three
years if need be but ... it's now or never.
I've decided. Do you understand, Ma?"'
  "Aye. I understand. But ... well, at least
you'll be with him, you'll be with your man, if you
marry, not like me."
  She had seen the tears and listened to advice
never given before, secrets never whispered before, and
then her mother said, "Bless you, lassie, go with
God, lassie. Let's tell thy Da'."
He was a Major, Indian Army retired,
twenty-five years service, eighteen of those with the
newly formed Gurkha Regiment, home on
leave only every two or three years, before being
forced to retire from wounds a decade ago, loathing
retirement.
  "Aye lassie, go wi' my blessing on two
conditions," he said. "If he spurns you,
tell him I'll find him and kill him,
second, if ever he rapes you, hurts you, cut
off his balls--I'll lend you my kookrie, young
Duncan won't need it for ten years yet."
  "Yes, Da'." The kookrie,
the Gurkha knife, was his most prized
possession. She was the eldest of three sisters,
with a brother of eight, and the first to leave home--children
of Britain were children for the Empire.
  Jamie put more coal on the fire and moved his
chair closer before he sat down. He took her
hand. "Maureen, three months ago I wrote
to you."
  "You wrote many a letter, not enough," she said
lightly, to give herself more time to prepare.
  "In all my letters for the last year I tried
to point out as best I could that this is no place for a
lady, it's not India where there's a regimental
life an--"
  "I've never been to India, as you know,
Jamie, my Ma only went once and never
again." She held his hand in both of hers. "Dinna
fash yoursel', this place can be bonny, never
fear. That's the job of a woman. I can make it
bonny."
  The tightness in his throat was choking him. No
way to ease into this, his brain was shouting at him, do
it or you'll never do it, do it now! Of course
it's not fair but you've not been fair to her at
all, not fair for years, you're rotten to have taken
advantage of her all these years, my God
you've been engaged three and knew her two before that
and you're rotten ... admit it and say it quickly.
Now!
  The flood commenced: "Three months ago I
wrote you that I felt, it must have arrived after you
left, I thought it wise we should break off our
engagement and you should forget me and that I was
terribly sorry but it was the best for you and I
won't go home and live there and work there, I
won't leave Asia until I have to, if I
get sick or ... I won't leave, can't, I
love Asia, love my job and there's no hope
for a happy time for you, I'm not worth it and I
admit I've taken advantage of you but we
can't marry, not possible and now that I'm going out
on my own ..." He stopped for breath then added
throatily, "I don't know what else to say,
there's nothing more to say except again to apologize
... there it is."
  He had taken his hand away. His stomach was
churning. Out came his handkerchief to mop his brow.
"Sorry," he said lamely and got up and sat
down, then toyed with the glass. "Sorry."
  Her hands lay in her lap. Her
eyes were concentrated and open and had never left his
face. "Dinna be sorry," she said gently with the
barest frown. "These things happen, laddie."
  His mouth dropped open. "Then you agree?"
  She laughed. "Of course, to part of what you
said, no' to all, of course--you're a man and
I'm a woman and we see things differently."
  "Eh? How?"
  "Well, first about jobs," she said. "A
woman's job, her work, is to look after a man,
to make a home, that's what I've been trained
for, home and family are the most important
things in the world." She saw Jamie about
to interrupt so she added quickly, "My Da' thinks
the Empire comes first but he's a man. Men have
jobs to go to, to work at to bring home the
porridge, a little meat, and aye some wusky. But
there has to be a home to bring it to. Without a
woman there's no home. It's very important
for a man to have someone you can trust to share the burden
while you work, or seek a job or start your own
business. You can trust me. Of the two, trying
to start your own business is best for you. Mr.
Gornt wants to do the same."
  "He does?"
  "Aye, sometime in the future, he says. Now
he's back here to take over Brock and Sons
an--"
  "He is?" Jamie blinked, diverted.
  "Aye. He says he's taking the job of this
man who tried to kill you, Mr. Greyfifth."
  "Greyforth. Norbert Greyforth." Jamie's
mind slammed back into gear: I must be losing my
wits with you appearing like a ghost, I'd forgotten
about Hoag and Malcolm and Hong Kong. "What
happened in Hong Kong? About Malcolm
Struan? Did Gornt say anything about
Morgan Brock or Tyler Brock?"
  "Patience, my bonny laddie, that comes
later. Back to you and me since you brought the
subject up as you did. We'll make a grand
team, the best, I promise. We're engaged.
I promise I will make the best wife ever, I
promise."
  "But don't you see, lassie, it won't
work," he said hating himself, but totally sure. "This
place is rough, the life rough, there are few
women here, you'll have no friends, nothing to do."
  She laughed. "Jamie, Jamie, you hav'na
heard a single word I've said. Now this
is what w--"
  A knock on the door stopped her. She
called out, "Won't be a second!" She got
up, continuing in the same gentle but firm voice,
"That'll be Dr. Hoag, he was urgent to see you
but I begged a couple of minutes first, I
could'na' wait to see you. Now I'll leave you
to him." She collected her hat and gloves and
coat and scarf. "Dinna concern yourself about me,
I'll be changed and ready in good time. I'll
knock on your door. Dinner's at nine, dinna
forget now."
  "Eh?" he asked blankly.
  "This Russian Count, Zerevev, some name like
that. We've accepted for dinner, Mr.
MacStruan told me all about it."
  She swept out, thanked Hoag, and before
Jamie could say anything, Hoag had closed the
door and had rushed up to him and said breathlessly, the
words tumbling out: "Hong Kong went like a dream,
Jamie, Malcolm was buried with full
honors, at sea like he and Angelique
wanted!"
  "He was what?"
  Hoag chortled, "You could have knocked me down
with a feather too, Tess arranged it off
Shek-O, one of his favorite places in all
the world, a few days before I arrived. Full
honors, Jamie, all flags at half mast,
ships dipping their flags, cannonade
salutes, pipers, everything, the funeral of the
tai-pan, though he never was. The papers
covered everything, I've the cuttings, month's
mourning for Hong Kong, Governor ordered a
special service in our church on the knoll in
Happy Valley of Culum fame, Gordon
Chen threw the biggest, most explosive
procession and wake in Chinatown's history--
except for the one he gave Dirk--of course
starting the usual bloody fires on the slopes
and they say a few thousand squatter shacks went
up in smoke, not only that, when I saw Tess
... can I have a drink, I'm parched!"
  "Of course. Go on, don't stop," Jamie
said and poured for both of them, his own glass long
since empty. He noticed his fingers were shaking.
Christ, why would Tess do that, a sea burial,
and what the hell is Maureen doing accepting for
dinner when we've got to talk? "Go on, for
Christ's sake!"
  First Hoag drank, "My God, that's good!"
He took off his coat and sat down, took a
deep breath and felt better. "My God I'm
pleased to see you. Where was I? Oh yes! When
I saw Tess the first time I was so upset for
her. It was awful. I met her in Culum's
old office and she said, "Ronald, tell me
the bad, all the details, tell it as it
happened." She was standing by the huge desk,
straight as a spar, pale, never so pale,
Jamie--the painting of Dirk on the wall, staring
at you with that green-eyed challenge, daring you to lie.
I told her as best I could, of course she'd
heard bits and pieces from Strongbow--you
remember I'd told him to tell her I was on
the mail ship and sorry couldn't come by Cloud because
there was an operation I had to perform.
  "She never wavered, she never wavered,
Jamie, just listened as I told about the
Tokaid@o, engagement, marriage and death as
best I could, as gently as I could, the duel,
Norbert, you and Gornt. It all came out,
don't remember my exact words but I told it
as it happened." He stopped a moment, less
nervous now. "You know how she is, always holding
back always hiding, the stiffest upper lip in
Christendom, she just thanked me, told me she
had the death certificate and inquest papers from
Strongbow. Remarkable woman. Uncanny.
That's about all--oh yes, she thanked me for
taking care of the coffin with the undertaker which went
perfectly, thank God."
  "Eh?"
  Hoag's eyes brightened. "Naturally I
didn't want the coffin opened up. I'd told
Strongbow to send it directly to Blore,
Christenson, Herberts, Herberts and Crink, do
lots of business with them, and ordered them "for
medical reasons" to put our coffin directly
into one of theirs, top quality, silver handles, and
to screw it tight at once, no lying in state
or opening it, I recommended against that due
to decomposition etc. and had advised Tess
by letter to that effect in the strongest terms. Glad
to say it went perfectly from our point of view,
and Malcolm's." Hoag refilled his glass.
"Glad I went. Otherwise all's well that
ends well."
  "Did you tell her about the other, about our
burial?"
  "Christ no, am I that stupid? You're
witless, Jamie."
  Jamie said, "I just asked to make sure," not
pleased to be reminded that Maureen had used the
same word. I think I really am losing them.
What the hell am I going to do with her? "Did
Tess say anything about Angelique?"
  "What she planned to do? No, though she asked
dozens of questions. How is Angelique?"
  "Fine--outwardly. Calm, stays to herself,
occasionally comes to dinner. Tonight she's going
to Zergeyev's, at Sir William's
request. Nothing like her old sparkle ..."
There's that word again, he thought miserably. "...
but, well, lovelier than ever. What did
Tess ask?"
  "Nothing much, only about the facts as I knew
them, that yes I believed they were in love, that
Malcolm pursued her, not the other way around, that
she was a lady about him, she accepted his
proposal and agreed to be married on Pearl."
  "But nothing about what she plans to do?"
  "No, that's the strange part. I thought she'd
fume about her, ask my advice, give me a
clue but she didn't, after all I'm their
family doctor for years, employed by her,
by Struan's, and I know her better than anyone.
She didn't comment on anything, volunteer
anything, the questions were just to cover details I'd
forgotten to mention. Weird."
  "Yes," Jamie said. "She'll have a
plan."
  "I agree. Of course the story was in the
press from the gutter to the Peak in lurid
details, "TAI-PAN DIES ON
WEDDING NIGHT," that kind of headline though she
had tried to bury it, sorry no pun intended.
I've all the cuttings for you, and this." His eyes
took on a different glow. He gave Jamie
an envelope. Tess's handwriting. Mr.
J. McFay, Personal by Hand. "Before you
ask, I don't know what's in it. She just said,
Please give it to Mr. McFay as soon as you
arrive."
  Jamie put it on the desk. "Why did you
come back?"
  "Before I forget, something else. Old Man
Brock and his equally vile son, Sir
Morgan, turned up at the funeral."
  "What, uninvited?"
  "Created a furore! It happened like this.
Tess arranged the funeral on China Cloud.
Gun carriage to the clipper along the
promenade. Forty guests invited aboard,
Governor, all the nobs, Admiral Sir
Vincent-Sindery, General Skaffer--the new
Commander in chief Asia, very pukka and Indian
Army--all tai-pans and Gordon Chen. No
press. Just as China Cloud swung into wind
off Shek-O place, the service about to begin,
Old Man Brock and Morgan arrived in his
clipper, Hunting Witch. She stood off, a
few chains away, dressed overall, his flag
at half mast, him and Morgan on the
quarterdeck dressed in funeral finery, top
hats, ruffled shirts, and when the coffin went into the
sea, the bastard fired a cannonade salute and
opened champagne--everyone aboard said they heard
the cork go. They drank a toast, threw the
glasses and bottle into the sea, raising their
toppers as they sailed off noisily."
  "Bastards! Bloody bastards!"
  "Yes! Later they claimed "it were to honor
the poor dead laddie!" The Governor was standing
next to Tess. He told me she did nothing,
said nothing, just stayed like a poker, except he
heard her breath hiss out and the violence in it
shocked him, said it made his balls jump, you know
the feeling ... oh, I forgot to mention, Gornt
was also on Brock's quarterdeck."
  "Maureen said he was taking over Brock's
here."
  "Yes. Even so he's a nice young man, I
think. Even so. He told me he was ordered
aboard Hunting Witch and ... by Jove, I
forgot to mention Maureen! Jamie, you're a
lucky man."
  "Thanks."
  "Very lucky." Hoag stuck out his hand.
"Congratulations."
  "Thanks." Jamie shook hands and pretended
to be pleased, filled with gloom. "We thought ...
I thought she was Tess. Through the binoculars, the
dark and being muffled up, easy to make the
mistake."
  "Eh? Nonsense, she's nothing like her at
all!"
  Aggravated Jamie said, "I know that but
they're about the same height, and it's the way she
stood, just like Tess, you know, stiff."
  Hoag frowned, then grunted, "Never occurred
to me. Now that you mention it that's true, but she's
nothing like Tess to look at, she must be at least
ten to fifteen years younger and that red-brown hair of
hers and sparkling personality."
  "Christ, give over! I know that! It was an
easy mistake."
  "A lucky one." Hoag felt queasy.
"Wouldn't have enjoyed the trip with Tess, my
God no! Your Maureen's a smasher! She said
she'd written that she was arriving."
  "Yes, at Hong Kong, not here. And no
arrival date there."
  "Ah, obviously there was no time as Prancing
Cloud was leaving imminently and she'd just
arrived." Hoag chuckled. "Best watch her or
you'll lose her. Gornt was quite taken."
  Jamie flushed, jealous in spite of himself.
"Thanks for the tip. How're Tess's kids?
Did you see them?"
  "Oh yes. They're all healthy, though
Duncan had another rotten cold. They'd all
been to the funeral--I heard it was so sad, young
Duncan trying to be brave, Emma and Rose
crying, Tess veiled, heavily veiled--everyone
knowing it was the end of an era, the end of Dirk's
direct line except Duncan, and he can't
inherit for years, the lad's just ten. Doesn't
auger well for the Noble House. The hottest
rumor in Hong Kong is that Brock's have got
the Noble House on the run."
  "No way!" Jamie tried to sound convincing.
"The new tai-pan will come from Robb's line,
Robb Struan, Dirk's stepbrother. One of
his sons or grandsons will be tai-pan."
  "I suppose you're right, but it won't be the
same. Bloody awful about Malcolm, he was
Tess's hope. All the time I was in Hong
Kong, I was thinking about our burial, so unnecessary,
eh? It's best if we put that away forever.
Malcolm was buried there, off Shek-O."
  "I wish he had been, as Sir William and
we all wanted." Last night Jamie had
another nightmare about what the Bosun said he had
seen, the corpse clawing for the surface, eyes
wide open. He felt chilled again. "We did
the best we could. Now," he said, "why are you
back?"
  Hoag got up. "Tess asked if I'd,
er, deliver mail to MacStruan, you
and, and see Angelique and give her a letter."
He saw Jamie's eyes. "I don't know
what's in them."
  "Them?" Jamie said sharply. "You said a
letter?"
  Hoag reddened. "Oh, er, yes. Yes well
a letter. I don't know what's in it. Well
I'd better be go--"
  "Come on, for God's sake!"
  "Tess asked me to give her a, a letter that's
all."
  "Come on, I know you!"
  Hoag said irritably, "I think I'd
better go and see her, she'll want to know--"
  "Sit down! What letters, for Christ's sweet
sake?"
  "I don't know ab--"
  "Don't give me that shit! What letters?"
  Hoag hesitated, then blurted out, "If
you'll swear on your mother's head I'll ...
I'll tell you."
  "Done!"
  The Doctor sat down. "She, Tess, she
just said, "Give that woman this letter, wait a
week or so and then give her one of these two
letters." She gave me three in all, I
don't know what's in them, I swear to God I
don't."
  "A week? You mean until Preggers Day?
One of two letters, eh? One if she's preggers
one if she isn't?"
  "The 11th would, would be the first day but it's not
possible to tell then, have to wait at least two
weeks after that and even then, safer to wait the month
and see if she, if she does or doesn't
menstruate. The date may be off, it's
difficult to tell sometimes, in her case because the
poor girl has gone through a tremendous amount of
stress--Tess asked me to wait until I could
be sure." He exhaled. "There, now you know
everything."
  "Tess asked you to wait until you've
examined her?"
  "Well, yes, until I'm sure."
  "Then it's one letter if she is, the other if she
isn't?"
  "Yes ... I told you. Yes."
  "Who else have you told?" Jamie's eyes
burned into him.
  "No one."
  "Who?"
  "Go to hell!" Hoag shouted, then spat out,
"Gornt!"
  "Jesus Christ, why him?"
  "I don't know, he seemed to know, jumped to the
same conclusion as I suppose everyone will, I
agree it's fairly obvious now I'm back--
I told Tess that but she said nothing, just looked
at me with those grey eyes of hers. It's easy
for you, Jamie," he said, seething. "It's easy
for you and the Gornts of the world, you're strong and used
to business and isn't business lying most of the time?
Well doctors aren't." Disgusted with his
inability to keep secrets Hoag blew the
breath out of his mouth. "Can't change after all this
time. Tess said to tell Sir William why I
was back, Albert and you, and no one else."
  "Don't worry, you're right, there won't be a
man in Yokohama who won't realize why
you're here for Christ's sake. Poor bloody
Angelique! Who else have you mail for, from
Tess?"
  "I ... Sir William."
  "Who else? Who else for Christ's sweet
sake?"
  "Heavenly Skye."

  Pretending a tranquility he did not feel,
Hoag handed Angelique the envelope that was
sealed with the chop of the Noble House. Her stomach
had been churning ever since Jamie had told her
who had arrived with Prancing Cloud, however much
she had tried to be detached. Even Vargas's
almost immediate news that the woman was Senhor
McFay's fianc@ee and not Tess Struan had
not settled her. Nor had Hoag's rambling
story about Malcolm's funeral which had confused
her even more. The writing on the envelope was
copperplate: "Angelique Richaud,
By Hand."
  "Why don't you read it while I'm here," he
was saying, concerned at her sudden flush.
  "You mean in case I faint?" she asked
sharply, sitting up in the tall chair beside the
fire, Malcolm's chair that she had taken from his
suite before vacating it for Albert MacStruan.
  Hoag said kindly, "I mean you may want
to talk. I'm a friend, as well as a doctor."
He had rushed upstairs directly from Jamie,
glad to leave the inquisition, had
greeted and hugged her and brushed aside her immediate,
What happened in Hong Kong, saying, "Just a
second, let me look at you." He had
scrutinized her as a doctor, then as a friend. In
both cases what he saw had pleased him. "Just
a suggestion."
  "The letter's not addressed correctly. It should
be Mrs. Angelique Struan, or Mrs.
Malcolm Struan." Awkwardly, she
returned it.
  "Tess said you would do that." It was said gently.
  "If she's so wise why didn't she address
it properly?"
  "It's difficult for her as it is difficult
for you. She's a mother who's lost a son. Be
patient, Angelique."
  "Patient? Me? When I'm under siege for
marrying and loving a fine man who ... You're on
her side, Struan's pays you."
  "True but my side is what I think best,
that's not saleable, even to you." Hoag sat
amiably in his chair. The room was warm and
feminine and filled with tension. He saw the vein in
her neck pulsing hard, fingers twitching ever so
slightly. "I helped you, and Malcolm, but
only because I thought it best. For your private knowledge
I resigned while I was in Hong Kong. This
is my last task for the Noble House."
  She was startled. "Why did you do that?"
  Again the same strange smile. "I'm going
back to India, I'm going to try to find that which I
lost. Soon as I can."
  "Ah! Arjumand." That made her feel better
and she leaned over and touched him. "Sorry.
Sorry I said what I said, it was wrong.
Sorry. It's just--sorry."
  "Think nothing of it. Don't forget I'm a
doctor, I do really understand the stress you're
under. I was prepared for worse." He broke the
seal and opened the letter. "She told me to do this."
Inside was another envelope. This was addressed
simply: Angelique. "A compromise, eh?
A suggested compromise."
  "Yours?"
  "Yes."
  "Do you know what it says?"
  "No. God's truth. Do you want me
to leave?"
  Her gaze locked on to the letter. In a moment
she shook her head so he went to the
window to give her space, moved the curtains
aside and watched the night, his own heart pounding.
  She hesitated, then opened it. No greeting.
No name.

  I cannot forgive you for what you did to my son.
  I truly believe, at your father's behest and
encouragement, you set your cap for my son to snare
him into marriage, any form of marriage. Your
"marriage" to my son is invalid, I am
assured. This "marriage" hastened his death, I
am assured--the death certificate indicates
this, I am assured. To that end Struan's
solicitors are drafting writs for the case to be
brought expeditiously before the High Court in
Hong Kong. If you carry my son's child this will not
divert the course of justice or avoid declaring the
child illegitimate.
  I cannot thank you enough for the invaluable information
given me, at your instigation, by a mutual
acquaintance.
  If, as I believe will be the case, his
material proves to be valid, I and the Noble
House will be indebted to you, and to this person in a
manner beyond price. That he named a price,
reasonable considering its value, is not your
affair, you asked for none and will get none. But your
gift to my son's memory and the future of
Struan's deserves consideration.
  How to resolve this impasse?
  The resolution, if any can be found, must be
private between us foes--we will always be that--and as
women.
  First I ask that you cooperate with Dr.
Hoag, allowing him to examine you at the correct
time to establish if you are bearing a child or not. Of
course Dr. Babcott or any other doctor
you wish can be consulted to corroborate the
diagnosis.
  Second, let us wait for the second month
to be sure, then we can proceed. By that time the
legal brief will be complete and ready for court
submission--this is not meant as a threat only as
fact. By that time, the evidence of our acquaintance
will have been put to work, partially. At present I
do not see how it can fail. That you persuaded him
to see me has, as said above, obligated me and the
Noble House to you.
  Perhaps, by then, with the help of God, the
impasse may be solved. Tess
Struan, Hong Kong, December 30th,
'62.

  Angelique's mind was hacking between happiness
and terror, victory and defeat. Had she won
or had she failed? Tess Struan promised
nothing, but had she waved an olive branch?
Legal brief? Courts? Witness box? Ashen
now she remembered Skye's words about how easy
it would be for the opposition to paint her as a penniless
Jezebel, daughter of a felon and other horrid
twisted truths. "Impasse" and
"resolution"? Didn't that mean she had won,
at least a partial victory.
  Edward! Tonight or tomorrow Edward will tell me! And
Mr. Skye, he's clever, he'll know, oh
God, I hope he'll know.
  She looked up and saw Hoag watching her.
"Oh! Sorry, I'd forgotten ..." Numbly
she twisted the material of a sleeve, her foot
tapping restlessly. "Oh, did you want a
drink, I can ring for Ah Soh, I ... sorry
... I don't seem to ..." the words were
difficult to form and he heard the change and
wondered if this was the beginning of the breakdown he had
forecast. Signs were there, fingers and toes working
unnoticed, face white, eyes wide, pupils
changed.
  "What did she say?" he asked easily.
  "I ... well, nothing except to, to wait
until ..." The words drifted away and her
gaze went to the distance.
  "Until?" he asked, to bring her back,
hiding his concern.
  But she was swept up in what she had read. So
the battle lines had been drawn. She knew the
worst, or the best. Her enemy had made the first
move and declared herself. Now she could join battle.
On her own terms. The nausea slid away.
In its place came fire. The thought that SHE
had laid out the foul and possible so icily was
making her sting with rage--nothing on her side, no
concern for her, no tiny concession for all the love
and agony and pain over Malcolm's death,
nothing. Nothing. And worst of all
illegitimate when they were married properly according
to British law ... I am assured!
  Never fear, she seethed, that's branded on my
memory in molten steel, and looked at Hoag
again, quivering. "She said she wants
to, to wait, to wait until we, you and I, we
know if I'm carrying Malcolm's child or not.
She wants to make sure, that's what she
wants."
  "And then?"
  "She doesn't say. She, she wants
to wait and me to wait. There's a vague ... I
think she says perhaps there can be a peace, a
resol--" The quivering stopped as a decision
washed it away and her voice became sibilant,
sizzling with venom, "I hope there will be a peace,
because ... because, by the Blessed Mother, I am
Malcolm Struan's widow, and no one, no
court, not even Tess Goddamned Struan can
take that away from me!"
  He covered his nervousness, saying cautiously,
"We all believe you are. But you've got to be
calm and not worry. If you break, she wins, you
lose, whatever the truth. No need ..."
  The door swung open. Ah Soh waddled
in. "Missee-tai-tai?"
  "Ayeeyah!" Angelique flared. "Get
out, why you no knock?"
  Ah Soh planted her feet, secretly
pleased that the foreign devil had lost her temper
and so lost face. "Mess'ge, you wan', heya?
Mess'ge, Missee-tai-tai?"
  "What message?"
  Ah Soh shuffled up, offered the small
envelope, sniffed and went away. Gornt's
writing. Angelique came down from the mountain of
her fury.
  Inside was a card, engraved E.g. The
message said, "Warmest greetings. A most
intriguing Hong Kong visit. May we meet
tomorrow morning? your most obedient servant, Edward
Gornt."
  Abruptly she felt whole again. Strong,
filled with determination and hope and fight. "You're
right, Doctor, but I won't break, I swear
I won't, I won't for Malcolm and I
won't for me, and for you and Jamie and Mr.
Skye. You're a dear friend and I'm all right
now. No need to discuss that woman anymore."
She smiled at him and he knew the smile was
both good and bad--more danger signals. "We'll
wait, we'll wait and see what the future
holds. Don't worry, if I don't feel
well I'll call at once." She got up and
kissed Hoag on both cheeks.
"Thank you again, dear friend. Will you be dining at
Count Zergeyev's?"
  "Perhaps. I don't know. I'm a little tired,"
he said and left, hiding his foreboding.
  Again she read the card. Edward's
circumspect, another good sign, she thought.
If the card was intercepted or read, it gave
nothing away. "Intriguing" was a good word
to choose, and "obedient servant" again chosen
carefully. Like the words of that woman, God
rot her.
  What to do?
  Dress for dinner. Gather your allies. Bind
them to you. Put the plans you've contrived
into place. And make Yokohama your
impregnable bastion against that woman.

  "Ignore the gai-jin soldiers trying to find
you, Hiraga, and forget Akimoto,"
Katsumata said, disgusted with the unexpected snag
in his plan. "Three of us are enough. We
attack tomorrow, burn the church and sink the ship.
Takeda, you take the church."
  "Gladly, Sensei, but why not use Ori's
plan and burn Yokohama? Hiraga is right,
forget the ship, he is right, so sorry," Takeda
said, inclined to his side--after all, Hiraga was
the Choshu leader and wise to consider how to retreat.
"He is correct that it would be difficult to get
close to a ship in this sea and wind unobserved.
Why not use Ori's plan instead, burn the
whole gai-jin nest?"
  Hiraga said, "Ori's plan needs time, and a
south wind. I agree it's a better plan.
We should wait."
  "No," Katsumata said harshly, rudely,
"with courage we can do both, with courage! We can.
Both! With shishi courage!"
  Hiraga was still rocked by the unforeseen
soldiers, his mind slow. That he believed he had
killed the scavenger bothered him not a bit--the
man was motionless in the dirt when, later, he had
slunk for the well head, groped down it, then
blindly through the meanness of the tunnel and freezing
water.
  "Impossible with only three of us," he said,
"and tomorrow night is too soon, whatever we
decide. If the plan's to burn the Settlement
we need three days to place the flamers, and
fuses. I advise against haste."
  He was wrapped in a quilt, naked but for a
loincloth--maids were drying his clothes, sopping
wet from the tunnel water. The little bungalow was
cold, the wind whining around the shojis and it took
much of his will to keep from shivering openly. It was hard
to concentrate. He still could not understand why soldiers
were searching for him. The moment he had arrived here,
Katsumata had angrily asked Raiko to send
spies into the Settlement to find out what had
happened and the three of them made plans to escape
the Three Carp in case searchers came into the
Yoshiwara.
  Now he was watching Katsumata pour more
sak`e. Anger had tightened his already sharp
features, making him seem even more dangerous:
"Hiraga, my opinion is we attack tomorrow."
  "My opinion," Hiraga said with equal
firmness, "is we move when we have a chance of
success and not before--always your advice--unless
caught in the open and face death or capture.
Takeda, what is your opinion?"
  "First I'd like to know what would be your plan? You
know the target like no one else. What would you do?"
  Hiraga drank his hot tea, pulled the
quilt closer again, pretending to think, thankful that
Takeda was teetering towards his position. "If
I had my normal access, Akimoto and I
could have all the flamers into place in three days--
I have four already prepared and hidden in my
village house," he said, embellishing the
story. "We need about six, eight would be best:
one in each of both the two-story buildings,
they're wood and tinder dry and almost burned up in
the last earthquake; the gai-jin leader's house;
the house next door; three or four in Drunk
Town; one in each church. In the confusion we can
make an escape by our boat to Yedo."
  "Now how much time would that take?" Katsumata
asked even more rudely and the two men shifted
uneasily. "How many days, now you do not have
"normal access"?"
  "I can tell you that as soon as I know why the
soldiers search for me," Hiraga said narrowly.
Katsumata's swords were beside him, his own
swords within easy reach. The moment he had
arrived he had asked Raiko for the swords she
had hidden for him--in the event they had to make a
sudden escape over the walls and into the paddy behind
the Yoshiwara. All of them had decided it was
too dangerous to hide in the tunnel.
"Takeda?"
  "I propose we wait until we know what
your trouble is. Then we can agree on a final
plan, Sensei--but if we could do as Hiraga
says I would be for that."
  "We must attack tomorrow. That is our final
plan."
  Thinking better now, Hiraga threw out a
bait. "If we could do both, sink a ship and
fire the Settlement that would be best," he said
to placate Katsumata. "It would be possible
if we planned it, but we need more men. A few
men more, Sensei," he added, using the title of
respect he had so far avoided, to further
flatter him. "We could get three men from Yedo.
Takeda could go, he's not known, he could bring them
back in three or four days. I am marked and
cannot move until the attack. You will lead us against
the ship--I can tell the others where to place the
flamers, can still guide them where to go and how to do it."
  "It is good plan, Sensei," Takeda said,
having seized on the chance of escape by boat--
never one for a suicide attack. "I will go
to Yedo, and find the men."
  "You would be caught," Katsumata said, his
lips a thin line. "You have never been there and do not
know the alleys or where to go. You would be caught."
His rage was near exploding for he could not attack
by himself and needed these two, or other men, and without
consensus nothing would be achieved. If anyone should
go it must be him. That thought did not displease him for
he did not like this place, not enough exits, not enough
places to hide--he only felt safe in
Ky@oto or Osaka or Yedo, or at home
in Kagashima. Eeee, it would be good to see my
home and family again. But they must wait, he
thought and hardened his heart: "Sonno-joi must go
forward, Yoshi must be humbled ..."
Simultaneously the three men had their hands on
their swords. Shadows came on the shoji door.
  "Katsumata-sama?" It was Raiko. "I
have a maid with me."
  "Please come in." When they saw it was she they
relaxed. She bowed, the maid did the same, and
they bowed back.
  "Tell them, Tsuki-chan," she said to the
maid.
  "I went to the house of the shoya, Sires. He
said that Akimoto-sama was taken to the gai-jin
leader and after a short time taken to their
prison. It has not been possible yet to talk
to him but with his first meal, which one of our people serve, we
can find out more."
  "Good. He been beaten and was dragged?"
Katsumata asked.
  "No, Lord, neither, Lord."
  "Not beaten, you're sure?"
  "The shoya was also surprised, Sire.
Akimoto-sama was whistling and singing and heard
to say, as though it was part of the country song,
"Someone's betrayed someone.""
  Hiraga said darkly, "That's what he called
out in the village. What else did the shoya
say?"
  "The shoya says, So sorry, he does not
know yet why soldiers search for you. Guards are
still there. As soon as he knows the reason he will
send word."
  "Thank you, Tsuki-chan," Raiko said and
dismissed her.
  Katsumata said, "If he hadn't been
beaten, he must have given them the information they want
and they jailed him to protect him from you?"
  "No. He would not tell them anything,"
Hiraga said, his mind elsewhere: who's the
betrayer? His eyes flicked to Raiko.
  She was saying, "Perhaps I can find out. A
gai-jin client who might know is arriving any
moment. He might know, certainly he could find
out."

  Andr`e came into her room with a forced smile.
"Evening, Raiko-san," he said, disgusted with his
weakness. She greeted him coolly and offered
tea. When the tea had been taken he handed her the
small bag of coins. "Here another payment,
sorry not all but enough for moment. You want see
me?"
  "Waiting a little is fair, Furansu-san,
amongst friends," she said, annoyed. Feeling the
weight of the bag she was, secretly, content with the
amount--for the moment--and that the first important
matter had been settled. Then she added, to keep
up the pressure, so important with clients,
"A little is fair between friends, but a lot is not
correct, not at all."
  "I promise more in day or two."
  "So sorry your payments are far behind."
  Andr`e hesitated, then jerked off his gold
signet ring. "Here."
  "I do not want that," Raiko said. "Should I
release Hinodeh and allow her to leave, then
you--"
  "No. Please, no ... Listen, I have
information ..."
  Andr`e was not feeling at all well, both because
of her cool reception and also because of a migraine
acquired during the Yoshi interview that would not go
away. And because of Angelique. And because Tess
Struan was not aboard Prancing Cloud for
surely that would have made it easier for him
to negotiate a settlement and so get the wealth
he required. He had no wish to go to Hong
Kong, to challenge her there, in the lair of the Noble
House.
  Angelique's still the only chance you've got,
his brain kept hammering at him. Seratard had
again consulted Ketterer, Sir William, and
even Skye about the validity of the marriage. They
were all convinced it should hold up in a court.
"In Hong Kong? I'm not so sure,"
Ketterer had sneered, the others saying the same with
different words, in different degrees--except
Sir William. "Too many scallywags there,
judges aren't like they are in London--they're
colonials, plenty of corruption, plenty of
hanky-panky. A few taels of silver ...
don't forget Struan's are the Noble House
..."
  Raiko leaned closer to Andr`e. "Information,
Furansu-san?"
  "Yes." It was now or never with Raiko--and
Hinodeh. "Special. Secrets about secret
Yoshi meeting with gai-jin."
  "So ka!" she said, all attention. "Go
on, Furansu-sama."
  He told her what had happened, in detail,
to her intense interest, much sucking in of breath and
hissed exclamations. And when, abruptly, he
slid in the part about Yoshi wanting Hiraga, she
blanched. His anxiety evaporated, he hid his
joy and closed the trap: "So Hiraga friend of
you?"
  "No, not at all, he's a client of a friend,"
she said hastily, fanning herself, mind humming with the
wonderful pieces of intelligence to pass on to the
shoya and the Gyokoyama that would put him and them
totally into her debt--and to Meikin. Ah,
Meikin! she thought in passing, how long you will stay
alive. So sorry, you and yours will have
to pay, one way or another, Yoshi invested too
much in your late Koiko, but then you know that. Which
brings me to my pressing problem, how in the name of
all gods and the Amida Buddha, do I rid
myself of Hiraga, Katsumata and the other two,
they've become far too dangerous and ...
  Then she heard Andr`e's different voice.
"So Hiraga client of mama-san friend in
Yoshiwara. Hiraga with friend now. Neh?"
  Her guard dropped back into place. "I would
not know where he is. I imagine he is in the
Settlement as usual. Lord Yoshi wants him?
Why?"
  "Because Hiraga is shishi." Andr`e used the
word for the first time, aware of what it meant from
Yoshi's revelations. "Also for kill daimyo.
Daimyo Utani. Other killings too."
  She kept the fear off her face. "Terrible.
Shishi you say? I've heard of them. About this
information, old friend, may I ask about th--"
  "Hiraga dis'ppear, Raiko. No in
Settlement. Many soldiers search. Gone,
Raiko. Search all places. He gone."
  "Eeee, vanished? Soldiers? Vanished
to where?"
  "Here. To your friend. Where's your friend?"
  "Ah so sorry, I doubt he would be there,"
she said with perfect sincerity and shook her head
emphatically. "Probably he was warned and he
has run off to Kanagawa or some such place,
and so sorry, old friend, but that is not a good question
to ask. Your information is very interesting. Is there
more?"
  Andr`e sighed. He knew she knew. Now she
was at his mercy. For a time. "Yoshi samurai come
tomorrow for your Hiraga," he said, no longer
afraid because one word from him and patrols,
Japanese or British, would tear the House
of the Three Carp to pieces--after Hinodeh was
taken to safety. "If gai-jin not have Hiraga
tomorrow, much trouble, Raiko. For gai-jin,
Yoshiwara, all." The way he said it sent a
tremor through her. "Perhaps gai-jin put Enforcers
here, there, all places." He let that hover in
the air.
  "So?" she asked, a bead of sweat forming on
her upper lip, frightened of what was coming, all
else forgotten.
  "Have idea: if you ... so sorry," he said
sweetly, "if your friend hide
Hiraga few day, secret, safe place.
Then, at right time give gai-jin leader Hiraga
... perhaps get much money, enough you, and Hinodeh,
neh?" He was watching her and she tried not
to flinch. "Or your people give Hiraga to Yoshi.
Hiraga is shishi--valuable--better than
earrings," he said again and saw a shudder take her.
"Shishi valuable, neh?"
  When her heart had stopped thundering enough and she could
trust her voice, she mustered the best smile she
could, for clearly he believed she knew Hiraga
was here, and therefore he could, if provoked, put her
and the Three Carp in lethal jeopardy. "I will
ask my friend if she has seen him, or knows where
he is, then we can talk, quickly," she said,
voice conciliatory, deciding that it was better
to hurry all shishi out of her life as soon as
possible. Preferably tonight. "What wonderful
information you have discovered, how valuable, how clever
to know so much, it will bring some profit no doubt!
Ah Furansu-san," she said as if a sudden
thought to further distract him, "we hear that a
gai-jin lady has arrived from Hong Kong tonight.
She is the famous mother of the tai-pan?"
  "Eh? No." Andr`e said, absently, "No,
she, she promise in marriage to trader. Why?"
  "Would he be one of my clients, old friend?"
  "No, think Inn of Succulent Joy for year,
perhaps more, Jamie McFay."
  "Jami-san? Jami-san of Stru'n?"
Eeee, she thought like quicksilver, Nemi will need
to know quickly. She must prepare to present herself to this
lady in the Struan big house, to bow before her and
welcome her, and assure her in sharing his bed she
had been looking after Jami-san expertly--very
important to have good relations between nee-go-san
--second lady, a consort--and oku-san,
wife--because the wife pays all bills, and then
to invite her to a return visit to the Jami
house in the gardens of the Succulent Joy.
Eeee, that would be grand, then we could all get a
good look at her. "Furansu-sama, there is a
rumor the gai-jin put a Japanese in
prison tonight."
  "What? Don't know about that. Maybe find out
later. Not important. Listen, about
Hinodeh."
  She interrupted brightly, "Hinodeh was asking
me earlier if you were honoring her tonight. She will be
so pleased you are here--she honors you
greatly."
  Andr`e's chest felt tight. Now that he had
Raiko in his grip he would ask her, no, tell
her to make Hinodeh forgo the condition of the light.
Suddenly he was afraid to do so.
  "Yes?"
  "Nothing," he muttered. "I go Hinodeh."
  After he left she drank some brandy to steady
her nerves, chewed some fragrant tea leaves
to take away the smell then, worriedly, went
to the three shishi and told them part of Andr`e's
information about Yoshi demanding Hiraga, and that his men
would arrive tomorrow to take possession. "So sorry,
it would be best, if you left tonight, much safer for
you," she said, her voice heavy with dread.
"Katsumata-sama, this client swore Enforcers
and gai-jin soldiers were due any moment, coming
to search everywhere."
  The three men were silent, hearing of Yoshi's
secret dealings with the gai-jin, Katsumata was more
determined than ever to create trouble between them.
"Thank you, you have been of great service,
Raiko-san. We may leave, we may need
to stay, either way you will be well rewarded."
  "I really believe it would be better to leave
an--"
  Katsumata's voice rasped, "Either way you
will be well rewarded. Meanwhile we will discuss
how best to protect you."
  She did not want to go but she bowed, thanked him
and went out into the night, and when safely away
cursed him and them and Andr`e, at the same time
deciding who would be the trustworthy messenger
to speed Andr`e's intelligence to Meikin.
  "Light the lamps," Katsumata said. All
had guttered and most extinguished as she had opened
and closed the door and the wind had invaded the room.
With the door closed again the few remaining flames
settled but for an isolated draft. "Listen,"
he said, so that no one outside could hear:
"Hiraga, I will get more men and return in
three days. Hide here, safer than coming with me,
use a new disguise and hide in the tunnel.
If you are clever you will be safe."
  "Yes, Sensei."
  "In three days we gut Yokohama, kill
the ship, kill as many gai-jin as possible, and
escape. I will bring Bakufu uniforms.
Takeda, help Hiraga with the incendiaries. They
must be ready by the time I get back."
  Takeda said, "Better if I come with you,
Sensei. I can protect your back in case you
are seen or intercepted."
  "No. Stay with Hiraga." Katsumata
did not want to be encumbered, exceedingly
uncomfortable inside the Yoshiwara fence. "I'll
leave the moment the barricades are open."
  "It is the best plan. Sonno-joi,"
Hiraga said.
  He was feeling nauseated and light-headed at the
same time, aghast at the thought of Yoshi's men
arriving tomorrow, or Enforcers, and being caught--
inevitable now that Yoshi, personally, was after him--
knowing, too, the Sensei was right again: the walled
Settlement and fenced Yoshiwara were traps.
  At the same time he was marvelously
relieved. Now that his end was inevitable there was no
reason not to hurl himself whole-heartily into the
attack.
  Three days is a lifetime. With Katsumata
gone, who knows what may happen? In any event
I won't be taken alive.

  "My God, Jamie, look there!" Dmitri
said.
  Jamie glanced at the doorway. So did the
twenty other guests scattered around the reception
room in the Russian Legation. Conversation died
then picked up. Angelique was coming in on the arm
of Sir William. A long-sleeved and
simple black dress that showed off the paleness,
yet glow of her skin and set off the column of
her neck to perfection, the cut perfect, her tiny
waist and swell of her breasts presented
modestly, perfect for mourning, but no doubting their
hidden magic. Hair swept up. No
jewelry except a thin gold necklace and
wedding ring--Malcolm's signet ring now cut
to fit.
  "She's twenty-four carat."
  "Yes," Jamie said. Then, feeling a new
stir, looked around. Across the room Maureen was
smiling at him, surrounded by men, Pallidar
amongst them. He smiled back, liking what he
saw, still dumbfounded by her arrival, and courage
making such a formidable journey alone. What the
devil am I going to do?
  "Incredible about Hong Kong and Malc's
funeral, huh?"
  "You're right, Dmitri. I'd have
bet Tess would never do that." What's she up
to, he asked himself again, and what was in her letter
to Angelique, no chance to ask yet, no clue
from her appearance. His own had been illuminating.

  Dear Jamie, Mr. Gornt has told
me in detail what a good friend you were to my son.
I thank you with all my heart. But I still cannot
forgive you for not complying with my wishes--company
policy--for not diverting my son back to his
duty and persuade him to give up his attention to that
woman or, at the very least, to put her in
proportion and to return here; cannot forgive you aiding
and abetting him in his foolishness, particularly as
I pointed out at length his minority and that while
tai-pan in name he did not exercise those powers
until formally installed, and that, to my regret, I
did, temporarily.
  I understand from Mr. Gornt you intend to try
to form your own business. I wish you luck and
thank you for your many years of fine service. In
business Struan's will never be hostile. I
enclose a sight draft on London for five
thousand guineas. Please give my best wishes
to your fianc@ee. I enjoyed meeting her.
Tess Struan.

  He beamed at the thought of all that money. It
made his company possible, small to be sure, but
it gave him the time he needed, and also to ease
forward with the shoya though how those ventures would
prosper without Nakama/hiraga he did not
know. He pitied him. And Tess. In her case
he understood, and forgave her, not because of the money.
"What, Dmitri?"
  "You've every right to be smug. Your Maureen's
great."
  "Oh! Yes. Yes she is."
  "What about Nemi?" Dmitri asked.
  Jamie's smile vanished, his discomfort
returned, and he turned his back to the door.
"A bloody problem, Dmitri. I'd made a
date to see her tonight."
  "Jesus, in Struan's?"
  "No, thank God. In our ... in her
place."
  "Jesus, that was lucky. Are you going?"
  "Yes, why not? Christ Almighty, I
don't know ... When Maureen arrived out of the
dark ... it's not that I don't like her,
I'm still in a state of shock."
  "Sure, but a good one--you're lucky.
Listen, we're old buddies and can speak
straight. If you ... if you decide to stop with
Nemi, to pension her off, call it a day,
whatever, may I ask that you let me know? She's
a good sport, good fun and she speaks enough of our
lingo."
  "All right, but ..." Laughter from the men
surrounding Maureen attracted their attention there.
Then to Angelique. "Smashing, isn't she?"
Jamie said. "Angelique, I mean."

  Angelique and Sir William were waiting for
Zergeyev to join them. Tonight's dress and
coiffure had been decided on earlier--
selected specifically for Tess and this soiree
which was to have been their first battleground. Though her
enemy had not arrived she resolved not to alter her
plan, the effect was so pleasing. She had considered
wearing the Imperial Jade ring that Malcolm had
ordered from Hong Kong and had been delivered
by mail ship a week after his death, causing her
another flood of private tears. If Tess
had been here she would not have hesitated. Without that
reason the ring was wrong.
  Actually I'm glad she isn't here, she
told herself. Thank God Vargas warned me.
I need more time to prepare for that joust, person
to person--ah time, am I or am I not bearing
Malcolm's child ... "Good evening, Count
Zergeyev," she said with her gentle smile.
"Thank you for inviting me."
  "You're so welcome, you've already made the
evening a success. Evening Sir William. You
both know everyone, except a new guest." In a
sudden hush, everyone watching, comparing, Zergeyev
beckoned Maureen from the circle of admirers,
Marlowe amongst them now. "Miss Maureen
Ross, from Edinburgh, Jamie's fianc@ee.
Madame Angelique Struan."
  The moment Angelique had come in she had seen
Maureen, instantly scrutinized her from nice
head to neat shoe and decided she was no threat--
noticing Gornt in passing, but leaving him for
later. "Welcome to the furthest British outpost
in the world, More'selle Ross," she said
pleasantly, wondering how old she was, and
thinking, Yes, at night, in a muffler, this one
could easily be mistaken for that
woman--same tall, imposing way of standing;
same direct gaze. "Jamie is very lucky."
  "Thank you." The moment Angelique had come
into the room Maureen had scrutinized her from shining
head to tiny foot, recognized her beauty, and
while instinctively liking her, decided at
once she was a threat--her eyes had switched
to Jamie to see his open admiration, and the men around
him, no way of missing the general hum of
appreciation--and she readied for battle.
  "I'm so pleased to meet you and was awful sorry
to hear about your tragedy, I'm so ... everyone's
so sorry." With genuine feeling, she leaned down
and touched a cheek against Angelique's. "I do
hope we'll be friends." A special smile.
"Please, let's be friends. I'll need a friend,
dinna fear. Jamie said what a good friend you've
been to him."
  "No need for "please", Maureen--may
I call you Maureen, and would you call me
Angelique?" she said with a special smile,
acknowledging and understanding the warning put nicely and
without claws, that Jamie was personal property
and not to be flirted with. "Good, it would be very good to have
a girl friend. Perhaps we could have tea tomorrow?"
  "Och, I'd enjoy that. Angelique, what a
pretty name and pretty dress." Too severe,
yet too hourglass for mourning.
  "And so is yours, that color goes marvelously
with your hair." Green silk, expensive, but
English not Parisian and the cut old-fashioned.
Never mind. That can be improved, if she becomes
an intimate. "Jamie was a great friend to my
husband, and to me when I needed one badly. You
are very lucky," she said truthfully. "Now where
is your handsome fianc`e? Ah, there he is!"
  Watched by all eyes she linked arms with her.
Everyone beamed at the Entente Cordiale and, still
the center of attention, she guided Maureen to him.
"Be careful, Jamie, it's easy to see this
lady is very precious--there are too many
pirates in Yokohama."
  Those around laughed and she left them and went
back to Sir William, greeting Ketterer en
route--a special compliment and smile to him, and
later to Marlowe--as well as Settry
Pallidar, resplendent and rivaling Zergeyev
in his Cossack uniform. "La, Sir
William," she said. "How lucky we are."
  "To be ..." Zergeyev stopped
himself in time. He almost said, To be alive?
Instead he took a glass of champagne from a
silver platter held by a liveried manservant
and said, "To be in the presence of two such lovely
ladies, we are lucky! Your healths."
Everyone drank, and continued to compare. Zergeyev
was too worried to follow suit, much more concerned with
what other foul news had arrived with Prancing
Cloud, particularly for the other Ministers.
  An urgent, coded dispatch from St.
Petersburg--three months old--had arrived.
First, it related the usual trouble with Prussia,
troops massing on their Western borders, six
armies sent there; trouble expected soon with the
Ottoman Empire and Moslems to the south,
three armies sent there; famine everywhere, with
intellectuals such as Dostoyevesky and
Tolstoy advocating change and liberalization.
Second, it ordered him to press the Japanese
to remove their fishing villages from the Kuriles
and Sakhalin under threat of "serious
consequences." And third, much trouble for him
personally: You are appointed Governor
General of Russian Alaska. In the spring the
warship, Tsar Alexandre, will arrive with your
replacement for the Japans, and then carry you and your
entourage to our Alaskan capital Sitka where
you will be in residence for at least two years
to expedite Friendship.
  "Why so glum, friend?" Sir William asked
in Russian.
  Zergeyev saw that Angelique was again
surrounded, so drew him aside and told him about
his new posting. But not about "Friendship." This was the
code name of a top-secret State plan
to facilitate enforced, massive immigration of
hardy Siberian tribes into their vast
Alaskan-American territories that spread
hundreds of miles inland, adjoined Canada and
hugged the coast southwards to end not far from the
American-Canadian border. Hardy, tough,
warlike peoples who could, and would, over a
generation or three, trickle southwards and
eastwards to the vast prairies and warm exotic
lands of California, eventually to possess
America. The plan had been proposed by an
uncle twenty-five years earlier. "Two
years! A fornicating prison sentence!"
  "I agree." Sir William felt equally
uncomfortable with the vicissitudes of his
own Foreign Office, their aptitude for sudden
postings, equally olympian. "Alaska? Ugh!
Know nothing about it--have you ever been there? Last
year, the ship I was on stopped at Vancouver,
in our colony there. It's just an outpost, and we
went no further north."
  "Sitka's not much further. I was there as a
youth once. Now we've permanent settlement,
lots of traders, a few hundred shacks,"
Zergeyev said sourly. "Furs, freezing,
lawlessness, illiterates, Indians, drunks,
and no society. The place is a foul
wasteland, discovered by Bering and Chirikov a
hundred odd years ago ... at first they thought it
was just part of our northern territories,
fifty-odd miles across an inlet, not realizing
it was a Strait they named after Bering.
Sixty-odd years ago, one of my granduncles
helped form the Russian American Fur
Company, our fur-trading monopoly, and
appointed an imperious son of a whore--a cousin
called Baranof--to be Director who moved the
capital to Sitka. It's on an island off the
coast, totally miserable and called, guess what,
Baranof Island. Unfortunately my family
made Alaska a special interest. Hence the
posting. Matyeryeybitz! Both of them."
  Sir William laughed and Angelique
turned back to them. "May I share the joke?"
  "Er, it wasn't well, very funny, my
dear," he said, docketing the highly interesting
data for transmission to London, "just a
Russian vulgarity."
  "English humor, Angelique," Zergeyev
laughed. "And on that happy thought, it is time for
dinner."
  Gallantly he bowed, went over and took
Maureen into the dining room, Sir William and
Angelique followed, then the others.
Abundant silver on refectory table,
liveried menservants behind each chair, others
to bring in huge quantities of meats and borscht
and beets and pies and jugs of iced vodka,
champagne and French wines and sorbets.
Gypsy musicians from the Russian warship,
then later Cossack dancers from his entourage for
entertainment.
  Conversation buzzing and all of them still comparing: tiny
and tall, French against one of us, delightful
French accent, comfortable Scots. Both
beddable, Angelique much more so, both eligible,
and marriageable, Maureen much more so.

                 

    Saturday, 3rd January:
  "Mass'r down stair, Missee-tai-tai."
  "Master Gornt?"
  Ah Soh shrugged, standing in the doorway of
Angelique's boudoir. "Kwailoh
Mass'r." With her hand she indicated someone
tall, and closed the door with a customary bang.
  Angelique glanced quickly in the mirror.
Her suppressed excitement was all the makeup
she needed. A moment while she locked her
journal and put it away. A final check and she
swept out. Black silk dress with many
petticoats, hair tied with a neat chiffon
scarf, also black. Signet wedding ring. Down
the staircase oblivious of the servants at their
early morning chores.
  Into the tai-pan's office. Gornt stood by the
window, looking out at the bay. Chen waited
lugubriously.
  "Good morning, Edward."
  He turned and smiled a welcome. "'morning
Ma'am."
  "Can I order coffee, or champagne?"
  "Nothing thank you, I've had breakfast. Just
wanted to tell you about Hong Kong, and your shopping
list, hope I'm not disturbing you."
  "Thank you. Chen, wait outside, heya."
  The moment they were alone she said softly, "This
is Albert's office now, I'm borrowing it
while he's in the counting office with Vargas so we
may not have much time--it's hard to have somewhere to talk
privately. Let's sit here, Edward," she
said, motioning to the table in the window, the curtains
open. "Passersby can see us, that should be safe,
you were Malcolm's friend. Please quickly, what
happened."
  "May I say first how marvelous you look?"
  "So do you." Her anxiety was open now.
"Please?"
  "It went very well, I think," he said, as
quietly, "Tess would make a great poker
player, Angelique, so I can't be sure.
At our first meeting I told her about my
Brock information as we agreed, saying several
times in different ways it was because of you
I was seeing her. Not th--"
  "Were you the first to see her from the ship?"
  "Yes, I'm quite sure because I went ashore
on the pilot boat before Prancing Cloud
docked, with Captain Strongbow. After I told
Tess about the Brocks, there wasn't much of a
reaction, she listened intently, asked a few
questions and then said, Please come back tomorrow, with your
evidence, shortly after dawn. Use the side
door in the alley, it will be unlocked, and be
muffled up and careful, the Brocks have spies
everywhere. The next day ..."
  "Wait! Did you tell her about, about
Malcolm dying, and about our marriage?"
  "No, I let Strongbow do that," Gornt
said. "I'll start from the beginning. We went
ashore together on the pilot boat, at my
suggestion, keeping quiet about it, and Hoag out
of the plan--he's a loose mouth. I had
volunteered to support Strongbow and help because
I was a witness to part of it ... the poor fellow
was scared to death though it really was his duty to tell
her. When he blurted out that Malcolm was dead
she went white. In a few seconds she had
recovered her composure, astonishing how fast, but
she did and then she asked, her voice flat, she
asked him how Malcolm had died. Strongbow was
distraught and he stuttered, "I brought the death
certificate, Mrs. Struan, and inquest
findings and a letter from Sir William and it was from
natural causes and happened aboard Prancing
Cloud. We found him dead in the morning, after the
night he was wed" ..."
  "She shot to her feet like an arrow and
screeched, "You married my son to that woman?"'
Strongbow almost died and gabbled out the story as fast
as he could, about Pearl, about the duel, me saving
Jamie's life killing Norbert, finding
Malcolm, telling everything he knew, how you were
in shock. The sweat was pouring off him,
Angelique. I must admit I was sweating too
--after the first screech Tess just stood there, eyes
on fire like a Medusa. Then he gave her some
letters, I saw one was from Sir William,
mumbled sorry but it was his awful duty to tell her
and he stumbled away."
  Gornt took out a handkerchief and dried his
forehead, and Angelique felt weak, nauseated
at the strength of her enemy--if Tess could make
Gornt sweat like this, what might
Tess do to her? "She just stood there and then her
eyes turned on me. Astonishing how such a
woman could seem so ... so tall. And tough.
Tough one minute, soft the next but never her
guard down. I had to force my feet not to back
off and looked around pretending to be afraid of being
overheard, and said in a rush that I was dreadfully
sorry too, Malcolm really was my friend, that you
were her friend too and it was because of you I was there as I
had information that would bankrupt Tyler and Morgan
Brock. The moment I said "bankrupt
Tyler" the madness left her, at least the scary
fire left her and she sat down, still didn't
take her eyes off me, sat down and after a long
time said, "What information?"' I said I'd come
back tomorrow but she said with a voice like a knife,
What information? I gave her the bare bones
... Sorry, Angelique, could I have a
drink? Not champagne, whisky, bourbon if you
have it."
  She went to the sideboard and poured for him,
water for herself as he continued, "The next day I
brought half of the evidence and left it with her.
She--"
  "Wait, was she the same as the day before?"
  "Yes and no. Thanks, health, a long one
and a merry." He took a deep swig and gasped
as the spirit caught his throat. "Thanks. When
I'd finished she looked at me and I thought
I'd failed. That's one hell of a scary
woman, I wouldn't like to be her enemy."
  "But I am? Mon Dieu, Edward, tell
me the truth."
  "Yes, you are but that doesn't matter for the
moment, let me go on. I--"
  "You gave her my letter?"
  "Oh yes, sorry forgot to mention it, I did
that the first day, before I left, just as we agreed,
again stressing this was all your idea, telling her then
that as my arrangement was with Malcolm, the
tai-pan, and he was dead, I had considered the
deal was off and was going back to Shanghai to wait
for a new tai-pan. But you sought me out and begged
me to come to see her, saying I owed it to my friend
Malcolm, that he had mentioned my proposal to you
in secret--with none of the details--and you were
certain it would be his wish to pass the information on
to his mother as soon as possible, that I must do it
urgently. At first I didn't want to, but you
pleaded with me and persuaded me. So I
was there because of you and you had asked me to give her a
letter. I passed it over."
  "Did she read it in front of you?"
  "No. That was the first day. The next day at our
dawn meeting, after I'd given her part of the info,
she asked lots of questions, intelligent ones and said
to come back after sunset, the side door again. I
did. At once she said the dossier was
incomplete. I told her yes, sure, no
point in showing everything until I knew how
committed she would be--was she truly interested,
like Malcolm, in wrecking the Brocks? She said
yes, and asked why was I after them, and what was my
interest.
  "I told her bluntly. The whole story of
Morgan, the truth. It was Morgan I wanted
to break, if his father went too, that was fine with me.
I didn't mention that this made her my
step-aunt, not once in all the meetings, nor
did she. Never. Nor did she mention your letter
to her. Not once. All she did was ask questions.
After the Morgan revelations I expected her
to say something, how sorry she was, or that that was
typical of Morgan--after all he is her
brother. But nothing. She didn't say a word,
asked details of my deal with Malcolm and I
gave her the contract." He finished his glass.
"Your contract."
  "Your contract," she said, on edge. "How you
must hate her, Edward."
  "You're wrong, I don't hate her, I
think I understand she was living on her nerves.
Malcolm's death had torn her apart as much as
she tried to hide it and rise above it. I'm
sure of it. Malcolm was the future of the Noble
House, now she faces chaos--her only ray of
hope was me and my scheme, barely legal by the
way even in Hong Kong which stretches rules like
nowhere else. May I?" he asked lifting his
glass.
  "Of course," she had said, wondering about him.
  "She read the contract carefully then got up
and stared down at Hong Kong harbor, looking
frail in a way, spun steel in another.
"When do I get the rest of the evidence?"' she
asked and I told her now, if she agreed to the
deal. "It's agreed," she said and sat down and
signed her name, and chopped it in front of her
secretary as witness, then told her to lock up
and leave. She ..."
  "She never mentioned my signature as
witness."
  "No, though as you forecast she sure as hell
noticed it first thing. To continue: I stayed with her
perhaps four hours, guiding her through the maze of
papers and copies of papers, not that she needed much
guiding. Then she put them into a neat pile and
asked me about the Tokaid@o affair,
Malcolm, you, McFay, Tyrer, Suh
William, Norbert, what Morgan and Tyler
had told me in Shanghai, my opinions of you,
of Malcolm, did he pursue you, did you
pursue him, volunteering nothing, questions and more questions
--avoiding mine--her mind as sharp as a
samurai's sword. But I swear to God,
Angelique, every time Morgan or Old Man
Brock's name came up, every time I mentioned
another quirk that the papers allowed, or suggested
another barb that would rip into their empire, Tess
almost salivated."
  She shuddered. "Is, is there a chance for a peace
with me, do you think?"
  "I think so, let me finish in sequence. She
asked again if the deal Malcolm had signed was still
an agreeable reward. I said yes. She said,
"Tomorrow I will replace it with a more legal document
chopped and signed as the other." Now to the last
matter tonight, Mr. Gornt. What should I give
this woman? Angelique, I had told her you
had asked me for nothing, you only wanted to put
your husband's wishes and hopes before her, and that,
if they proved fruitful--I had told her you
knew nothing of their contents--that that would be reward
enough."
  "You used that word, "husband"? And she let it
pass?"
  "Yes but she said at once, "I am informed
that "marriage" whatever she claims or Sir
William says is not valid.""
  Angelique began to bridle but Gornt said,
"Not so fast, honey, be patient. I'm telling
you what she said. Be patient, time enough to make our
play. After that meeting she wanted another the
following evening. To keep everything on the table, I
told her I had seen the Brocks and told them
the same Yokohama story, particularly about the
duel, and had given them a copy of the Norbert's
inquest. Old Tyler was mad as a pit bull
terrier but Morgan calmed him, said that shooting
Jamie McFay in the back would have
hurt them more than the loss of one easily
replaceable manager."
  Angelique watched him collect his thoughts,
her heart thumping, so many questions unanswered yet.
"She'll act, act on the information?"
  "On my evidence, yes. Oh yes, and
quickly. I'll have my revenge and you'll get a
settlement."
  "Why are you sure?"
  "I'm sure, Ma'am, never fear. It's
taken years of biting my tongue, kowtowing, but
soon ... you'll see! When I told her about
my meeting with the Brocks--she kept asking about
them, what was Tyler's reaction to the marriage and
death of her son and so on, and never once used the
term "father." I told her frankly how they
both guffawed over your naval marriage and going
against her wishes, Old Man Brock had said,
"Pays the bitch back, for goin' agin mine!"
I told her straight how both gloated over
Malcolm's death, Morgan saying, now they've
no tai-pan and come February 1st Tess be out
of Jockey Club, busted in Hong Kong,
Tyler adding, An' I be The Tai-Pan,
Dirk's nose be in't shit an' Noble House
an' his name forgot forever!"
  "You said that to her?" Angelique's head
reeled.
  "Yes, Ma'am, but that's what Tyler said--
he really did. And he's the engine to send her
mad so thought I should report it accurately and
when I did, Lordy Lordy, Ma'am, her head was
shaking so much her eyeballs had a hard time
catching up and I thought the Medusa was coming back.
But it didn't, not this time. This time the fiend's
fire was confined, it was still there, oh yes Ma'am,
yes indeed. But she corked it, she kept it
inside, even so I sure as hell ... sorry,
I sure as shooting sweated. Not proper for a
woman to have that amount of rage but after Tyler and
Morgan easy to see where she gets it from.
  "When she'd cooled down a bitty, I told
her Tyler had eventually agreed to Morgan's
suggestion I should come back here as manager, on
trial for a year, with plenty of dire threats for
nonperformance. She asked my salary.
"Excellent. Publicly we will be enemies,
secretly we will be close allies, and if
Brock and Sons goes under forever which I pray
God happens, your
Rothwell-Gornt will take their place."
That's about it, Angelique, except she had
decided to send Hoag back here and was writing you
a letter."
  He sipped his bourbon, the taste turned
smooth. "I didn't ask what was in it or
make any defense of you other than continuing to say
in various ways, if my scheme helped her
destroy Brock's, she had you to thank too.
What was in her letter?"
  She had given it to him.
  "A lot of dung with the bales of cotton,"
he had said, handing it back. "It's her first
bargaining position--and clear from this I kept my
bargain: she's convinced she has to thank you as
well. You'll win."
  "Win what? No legal harassment?"
  "That and a stipend. She admits she's in your
debt."
  "Yes, but nothing more, just threats."
  "We hold a few trumps."
  "What?" They heard voices outside.
  "Time, among others, Angelique. Tonight
I'll invite you to a casual supper, we can
talk safely there an--"
  "Not in Brock's, and not alone. We must be
careful," she said hastily. "Please invite
Dmitri and Marlowe. We must be very careful,
Edward, must pretend not to be too close--that would
make that woman suspicious and she's bound
to hear, Albert is totally on her side. If
we can't talk tonight I'll promenade tomorrow at ten
and we can continue. ..." To forestall the embrace
she had felt imminent she had kissed him quickly
on the cheek and offered her hand, thanking him
effusively.
  When alone once more in the privacy of her
boudoir, she let her mind roam. What
trumps? What aces? And why that strange
smile? And what had he really agreed with
Tess? Is he hiding something from me? It's
true from her letter he convinced her of my help and
that's important. Or am I just being
over-suspicious? If only I could have been
there!
  Then the Am-I-or-am-I-not took
possession of her, racking her. Once, frightened,
she had mentioned it to Babcott who said, "Be
patient, don't worry." For a moment she
wondered if Babcott and Phillip
Tyrer would return from Yedo out of the enemy net
they had gone into willingly, sent by Sir
William.
  Men with their stupidities of patience and
mendacity and wrong priorities, what do they
know?

  In Yedo Castle, Yoshi was anxious and
irritable. It was midmorning, he was in his
quarters and still had no word how the gai-jin
doctor's examination of the tair@o had gone.
When he came back to Yedo from Kanagawa
yesterday with Babcott and Tyrer, he had
installed them in one of the daimyo's palaces
outside the castle walls that he had carefully
chosen, staffed and ringed with trusted guards for further
security, and at once invited Anjo for the
examination.
  The tair@o arrived in a nondescript
closed palanquin, protected by his own
bodyguard--the assassination attempt on him had
happened barely a hundred yards away. This,
together with the mass shishi attack on Sh@ogun
Nobusada and the various attempts on Yoshi
had increased the Elders' sensitivity and
security needs.
  Yoshi, with Babcott and Phillip Tyrer
beside him, met the clandestine palanquin in the
courtyard. They bowed, Yoshi making the lowest
bow, laughing to himself as, painfully, Anjo was
helped out. "Tair@o, this is the gai-jin
doctor, B'bc'tt, and interpreter Firrup
Tiara."
  Anjo gawked up at Babcott. "Eeee,
the man really is as big as a tree! So big,
eeee, a monster! Would his penis be in
proportion?"' Then he looked at Phillip
Tyrer and guffawed: "Straw hair, a face like
a monkey, a pig's blue eyes and a
Japanese name--that is one of your family names,
Yoshi-dono, neh?"'
  "The name has almost the same sound," Yoshi
said curtly, then to Tyrer, "When the examination
is completed, send these two men for me." He
pointed at Misamoto, the fisherman, his spy and
false samurai, and Misamoto's constant
guard, the samurai whose orders were never to leave
him alone with any gai-jin. "Anjo-dono, I
believe your health is in good hands."
  "Thank you for arranging this. The
Doctor will be sent to you when it pleases me, no
need to leave these men here, or any of your men
..."
  That was yesterday. All night he had worried
and this morning, worrying and hoping. His room was
changed. It was even more austere. All traces of
Koiko had been removed. Two guards stood
behind him and two at the door. Irritably he
got up from his writing table and went to the window and
leaned on the lintel. Far below he could see the
daimyo's palace in the inner circle. The
tair@o's men were standing guard there. No other
signs of activity. Over the rooftops of Yedo
he could see the ocean, and smoke trails of some
merchantmen and a warship out at sea inbound for
Yokohama.
  What do they carry, he asked himself. Guns?
Troops, cannon? What mischief are they
planning?
  To settle his nerves he sat back at his
table and continued practicing calligraphy.
Ordinarily the exercise soothed. Today it brought
no peace. Koiko's exquisite brushstrokes
kept forming on the paper and, try as he could, he
could not stop her face rising to the forefront of his
mind.
  "Baka!" he said, making a false stroke,
spoiling an hour of work. He threw the brush
down, splattering ink on the tatami. His guards
shifted uneasily and he cursed himself for the
lapse. You must control your memory. You must.
  Since that evil day she had beset him. The
smallness of her neck, hardly feeling the blow,
then rushing away instead of lighting her pyre, the
nights worst of all. Lonely in bed, and cold,
but no wish for a female body or for succor,
all illusions gone. After her betrayal, her
treason introducing the dragon woman Sumomo
into his inner chambers--no excuse was acceptable
for that, none, he told himself again, none. She must
have known about her. No excuse, no forgiveness, not
even as he now believed, for her sacrificial
charge to receive the shuriken that would have impaled him.
No woman could be trusted again. Except his
wife, perhaps, and consort perhaps. He had not sent for
either of them, only written, telling them to wait,
to guard their sons and keep their castle safe.
  He felt no real joy even in his victory
over the gai-jin though he was certain it was a
superb step forward, and sure that when he
told the Elders, they would be ecstatic. Even
Anjo. How sick is that dog? Unto death I
hope. Will the giant do his magic and cure him?
Or is the Chinese doctor to be believed, he
who Inejin says has never been wrong and
whispered an early death.
  Never mind. Anjo, sick or not, will listen
to me now, the others will listen at last, and agree
to my proposals. Why not? The gai-jin are
boxed, no threat now from the fleet, Sanjiro
almost done to death by gai-jin, Ogama satisfied
in Ky@oto. Sh@ogun Nobusada will be ordered
back to Yedo where he belongs, once he
explained the part the boy should play in the great
plan. And not only returning, but returning
alone, leaving his hostile wife, the Princess
Yazu, to "follow in a few days," never
to follow if Yoshi had his way--no need for the
others to be in his confidence. Only Ogama.
  Not even Ogama to know all of it, only the part
to enmesh the Princess and have her divorced
by Imperial "request." Ogama would see to it
that she stayed out of the way until she was safely and
permanently neutralized, content to live forever
within the palace quagmire of poetry
competitions, mysticism, and other world
ceremonials. And a new husband. Ogama.
  No, not Ogama, he thought, cynically
amused, though of course I will propose the
union. No, someone else, someone she will be
content with--the Prince to whom she was once
promised, and still honors. Ogama will be a fine
ally. In many ways. Until he goes
onwards.
  Meanwhile there is no need to share an
immortal truth I have discovered about gai-jin--with
Ogama, Anjo or anyone: Gai-jin do not
understand time as we do, they do not consider or think about
time as we do. They think time is finite. We do
not. They worry about time, minutes, hours, days
--months are important to them, exact
appointments sacrosanct. Not to us. Their version
of time controls them. So this is one cudgel we can
always use to beat them with.
  He smiled to himself, loving secrets, dreaming
of a thousand ways to use gai-jin time against real time
to dominate them, and through them the future. Patience
patience patience.
  Meanwhile I still have our Gates, though
Ogama's men control my men who
guard our Gates. That does not matter. Soon
we will possess them entirely, and the Son of
Heaven. Again. Will I live to see that? If I
do, I do, if I do not, I do not. Karma.
  Koiko's laugh sent a chill down his spine:
Ah Tora-chan you and karma! Startled, and
he looked around. It wasn't her. The laughter
came from the corridor, mixed with voices.
  "Sire?"
  "Come in," he said, recognizing Abeh.
  Abeh strode in, leaving his others outside.
The guards relaxed. With Abeh was one of the
household maids, a cheerful, middle-aged
woman, carrying a tray and fresh tea. Both
knelt, bowed. "Put the tray on the table," he
said. The maid obeyed, smiling. Abeh stayed
kneeling near the door. These were new orders: no
one was to come within two metres without permission.
"What were you laughing at?"
  To his surprise she said merrily, "At the
giant gai-jin, Sire, I saw him in the
courtyard, I thought I was seeing a kami--two
in fact, Sire, the other one with yellow hair and
blue eyes of a Siamese cat. Eeee,
Sire, I had to laugh. Imagine, blue
eyes! The tea's this season's, as you ordered.
Would like something to eat, please?"
  "Later," he said and dismissed her, feeling
calmer, her warm nature infectious. "Abeh,
they are in the courtyard? What is happening?"
  "Please excuse me, Sire, I do not
know," Abeh said, still furious that yesterday Anjo
had ordered them all away. "The Captain of the
tair@o's bodyguard came a moment ago and
ordered ... ordered me to conduct them back
to Kanagawa. What should I do, Sire? You will
of course want to see them first."
  "Where is Tair@o Anjo now?"
  "I only know that the two gai-jin are to be
taken back to Kanagawa, Sire. I asked the
Captain how the examination went and he said
insolently, "What examination?"' and left."
  "Bring the gai-jin here." Soon there were heavy,
foreign footsteps. A knock. "The gai-jin,
Sire." Abeh stood aside and motioned
Babcott and Tyrer forward, knelt and bowed.
They bowed standing, both unshaven and clearly tired.
Immediately one of the door guards angrily shoved
Tyrer to his knees, sending him sprawling. The
other guard tried the same with
Babcott but the Doctor twisted with uncanny
speed for such a huge man, grabbed the man by his
clothes near his throat, one-handed, lifting him off
his feet, slamming him back against the stone wall.
For a second he held the unconscious man
there, then gently let him crumple to the floor.
  In the shocked silence, Babcott said
carelessly, "Gomen nasai, Yoshi-sama,
but these twits shouldn't pick on guests.
Phillip, please translate that, and say I
haven't killed him though the ill-mannered sod will
have a headache for a week."
  The other samurai were coming out of their trance and
going for their swords. "Stop!" Yoshi ordered,
furious with the gai-jin and furious with the guards.
They froze.
  Weakly, Phillip Tyrer had picked himself
up, ignored the inert guard and said in his quaint,
halting Japanese, "Please excuse,
Yoshi-sama, but Doctor-sama and I, we bow
as foreign custom. Polite, yes? No mean
harm. Doctor-sama say, Please excuse,
man no dead only ..." He searched for the word,
could not find it, so he pointed at his head,
"Pain, one week, two."
  Yoshi laughed. Tension left the room.
"Take him away. When he wakes bring him
back." He waved the others to their places and
motioned the Englishmen to sit opposite him. When
they had settled themselves awkwardly, he said,
"How is the tair@o, how did the examination
go?"
  At once Babcott and Phillip replied
with simple words and gestures that they had agreed in
advance, explaining that the examination went well, that
the tair@o had a bad hernia--a rupture--that
Babcott could help relieve the pain with a
truss and medication which would have to be made and fetched
from the Settlement, that the tair@o had agreed he
should return in a week to fit it and bring the
results of tests. Meanwhile, he had given
him medication that would take most of the pain away and
help him sleep.
  Yoshi frowned. "This "hern'ah," it is
permanent?"
  "Doctor-sama say that--"
  "I know the Doctor is talking through you,
Taira," Yoshi snapped, displeased with what he
had heard, "just translate his words without
ceremonial titles!"
  "Yes, Sire. He says damage is
per'man'nt," a new word for him. "Tair@o
Anjo need ... need medicine always stop pain,
all time, sorry, each day time, and also use each
day time this "truss."" Tyrer used the English
word and with his hands, explained the belt and pressure
point. "Doctor think tair@o'-sama good
if has care. No can ... can not fight use
sword easy."
  Yoshi scowled, the results not heartening.
"How long ..." He stopped and waved his guards
out. "Wait outside." Abeh stayed. "You
too." Reluctantly his Captain closed the
door. Yoshi said, "The truth: How long will he
live?"
  "That only God says."
  "Huh, gods! How long Doctor thinks
tair@o will live?"
  Babcott hesitated. He had expected the
tair@o to order him not to speak to Yoshi but once
he had told him about the hernia and medicine, and
had given him some of his laudanum tincture which
had relieved the pain almost at once, the
tair@o had chuckled and encouraged him to relate
"the good news." But the hernia was only part of the
problem.
  His fuller diagnosis, one that he had not
told Anjo, or Phillip Tyrer, wanting
to reserve judgment until he had made an
analysis of urine and stool samples, had
consulted with Sir William and made a second
examination, was that he was afraid there could be a
dangerous deterioration of the intestines from unknown
causes.
  The physical had only taken an hour or
so, the verbal probing many hours. At forty-six,
Anjo was in bad condition. Teeth rotten,
surely septicemia from those sooner or later.
Bad reactions to delicate probing of stomach and
organs, obvious constrictions inside, very enlarged
prostate.
  Most of his diagnostic problem was due to his
and Phillip's lack of fluency, because the
patient was impatient, did not trust him yet,
and was not forthcoming with symptoms or clues. It
had taken much diligent questioning for him to probably
establish the man experienced difficulties with
bowel movements, passing urine and an inability
to hold erections--which seemed to concern him the most
--though Anjo had shrugged and would
admit none of the symptoms outright.
  "Phillip, tell Lord Yoshi I think he
will live about the average for a man in his condition of the
same age."
  Tyrer's headache had returned, aided by his
desperation to do a good job. "He live about same
as man of same age."
  Yoshi thought about that, also understanding the
difficulties of probing delicate matters in
a foreign language with inadequate
interpretation. Therefore he must keep the questions
simple. "Ask: two years, three years, one
year?" He watched Babcott closely, not
Tyrer.
  "Difficult say, Lord. In one week perhaps
know better."
  "But now? The truth. One two or three,
what think?"
  Babcott had realized before he left
Kanagawa that his function here was not only as a
doctor. Sir William had said: "To put it
bluntly, old chap, if the patient turns out
to be Anjo, you're also an important
representative of Her Majesty's
Government, me, the Settlement, and a bloody
spy--so, George, please don't pong on this
golden opportunity ..."
  For himself he was first and foremost a doctor. With
doctor-patient confidentiality. No doubt that
Yoshi was the enemy of the patient, a powerful
enemy, but also a potentially powerful friend
to H.m.'s Government. Balancing the two,
Yoshi was the more important in the long run.
Anjo had issued the ultimatum to evacuate
Yokohama, he was the head of the Bakufu who
would, unless there was a violent end to Yoshi,
certainly die before him. If forced what would you
answer? he asked himself. Within a year. He
answered instead: "One, two or three,
Yoshi-sama? Truth, sorry not know now."
  "Could it be more?"
  "Sorry, not possible say now."
  "Can you say next week?"
  "Perhaps say can, not more than three year next
week."
  "Perhaps you know more than you say, now or next
week."
  Babcott smiled with his mouth. "Phillip,
tell him politely I am here at his invitation,
a guest. As doctor, not magician,
and I don't need to return next week or
any week."
  "Damn it, George," Tyrer muttered
guardedly, "we don't want trouble, I don't
know what "magician" is, and damned if I
can cope with these nuances, for God's sake make
it simple."
  "What did you say, Taira?" Yoshi asked
sharply.
  "Oh! Sire, that ... difficult
translate words of High Leaders when ... when
many meanings, and not know bet word ... best word,
please excuse me."
  "You should study harder," Yoshi said testily,
infuriated that he did not have his own interpreter.
"You do well but not well enough, study harder! It
is important you work harder! Now what did he
say, exactly!"
  Tyrer took a deep breath, sweating. "He
say, he doctor, not like god, Yoshi-sama, not
know exact about tair@o. He ... he here
Yoshi invite. So sorry, if not want come
Yedo, Doctor-sama, not come Yedo." He
died a little more seeing Yoshi smile the insincere
way Babcott had, no mistaking that meaning, and
he cursed the day he decided to be an
interpreter. "So sorry."
  "So ka!" Grimly Yoshi weighed his
next move. The Doctor had proved useful
though he was hiding facts from him. If that was the
case, he deduced the real facts were bad, not
good. That thought pleased him. A second thought
pleased him. It was based on an enlightened idea
Misamoto unknowingly suggested months ago.
Yoshi had at once initiated the practice through
his spymaster, Inejin, for future use: one way
to control barbarians was through their whores.
  Inejin had been diligent as usual. So now
Yoshi knew a lot about the gai-jin Yoshiwara,
which were the most popular Inns, about Raiko and the
whore of this strange and so ugly youth, Taira,
the old one of many names now called Fujiko. And
about the strange whore of Furansu-san. The
gai-jin leader, Sur W'rum, had no
special whore. Serata used two
sporadically. Nemi was named as the consort of the
chief gai-jin trader and an especially good
source of information. The Doctor did not visit
the Yoshiwara. Why? Meikin will find out ...
  Ah yes, Meikin the
traitoress, you are not forgotten!
  "Tell the Doctor I look forward to seeing
him next week," he said, his voice flat.
"And thank him. Abeh!"
  Abeh was in the room, kneeling, in an
instant. "Escort them to Kanagawa. No,
take them to the gai-jin leader personally, at
Yokohama, and bring back the renegade
Hiraga."

  "Hello, Jamie! It's lunchtime! Last
night you said to call for you at one o'clock!"
Maureen smiled at him from his office doorway,
bonnet and dressed nicely, her cheeks rosy
from her brisk walk along the promenade from
Struan's. "One o'clock, you said, for lunch at this
Club of yours."
  "Be right with you, lassie," he said absently,
finishing the letter to his banker in Edinburgh about the
joint venture with the shoya, enclosing Tess
Struan's sight draft for deposit. Got
to talk to Nakama-Hiraga somehow as soon as
he's found, he was thinking. Where the devil is
he? Hope to God he hasn't fled as everyone
thinks. "Take a seat, Albert's joining us."
He was so engrossed he missed her disappointment.
  This new office was in the Guardian building,
near to Drunk Town, on the High Street. It
was much smaller than the one in Struan's but it had
a pleasant view of the bay, so important for the
trader to be able to follow the coming and going of ships.
Unfurnished except for a desk and three
chairs, half a dozen filing cabinets.
Piles of books and boxes, sheaves of blank
paper, pens and new ledgers that he had scrounged
until his order from Hong Kong arrived, were
scattered everywhere. Heaped on his desk were more
papers, letters, orders and a big mailing announcing
the launch of his new company and requests for
business. All had to be made ready for
Prancing Cloud's departure. "Did you
sleep well?"
  He sealed the letter, hardly hearing her. "Yes
thank you, did you?" and picked up another of the
mailings.
  These were being copied by two Portuguese
clerks in their office down the corridor, next
to the printing shop. The clerks had been lent
by MacStruan until he could make permanent
arrangements. "Albert's a good
fellow isn't he? I said we might be late,"
he remarked absently. If it had been up to him
he would have skipped the Club and asked one of the
clerks to make him a sandwich, or ordered some of the
Chinese food that they ordered daily from Drunk
Town. Half an hour later he put down his
pen. "All set?" he asked brightly.
  "Aye."
  "What's up?" he asked, seeing her look.
  "Weel, laddie, I'd hoped we could be
alone for lunch, there's a lot to talk about--
obviously there was no time last night. It was a
bonnie party though, wasn't it?"
  "Yes it was. The Cossack dancers were
stunning. We've lots of time to talk, sorry,
didn't think it was important."
  "Angelique was stunning too, aye, and many of
your friends, Marlowe and Settry!" She laughed
lightly.
  Relieved, his guard came down and he picked
up his hat and coat and opened the door. "Glad
you enjoyed it."
  "You went out last night, after we'd said good
night."
  His guard came up too late to prevent the
guilty flush. "Yes, er, yes I did."
  "I knocked on your door but there was no
answer--I just wanted to talk, I wasn't
tired. You said you were tired."
  "Well, yes I was, but then I wasn't,
shall we go?"
  "Aye, I'm hungry." They went out on to the
promenade. Few people were about. The day was not the
best, sea choppy and wind cutting. "It's no'
as bad as Glasgow at this time of the year," she said
pleasantly, taking his arm.
  "That's true, but the cold won't last, soon
it'll be the best time, the spring and autumn are
best." He was breathing better now that the subject
had been dropped. "Spring and autumn are the
best."
  "You went to the Yoshiwara?" she asked
pleasantly.
  An ice pick leapt from his testicles to his
heart and back again and a thousand answers presented
themselves, the best of which was, If I want to go to the
Yoshiwara by God I will go and we aren't married
and even if I was ... and I told you I
didn't want to be married, at least not yet, not
now that the new business has a chance.
Confidently he opened his mouth to say all that but for
some reason his voice came out strangled and
limp: "I, er, yes I did but th--"
  "Did you have a good time?"
  "Look, Maureen. There's some--"
  "I know about the Yoshiwara, laddie, and about
men," she said matter-of-fact and kindly. "Did
you have a good time?"
  He stopped, rocked at the gentle voice and
manner. "I, well, I suppose ... but you
see, Maur--"
  "It's too cold to stop, Jamie, dear."
In friendly fashion, she took his arm again and forced
him to walk on again and continued, "Good, so you had a
good time. Why did you no' tell me? And why
tell a fib about being tired?"
  "Well because ..." Again a dozen answers, but
his mouth only issued, "Because it's obvious for
goodness' sake. I didn't want ..." He
couldn't say, I didn't want to hurt you because
I'd made a date, wanted to see Nemi yet
didn't want to, didn't want you to know about
her and actually I had a dreadful time.
  When he had walked into their little house Nemi was
dressed in her best sleeping kimono, their little
sanctuary pristine, food and sak`e prepared and
she was laughing and happy and completely
attentive: "Heya, Jami-san, good you see
ah! Hear good new from boat. You to marr'iage
'rady from Scut 'rand, marriage heya?"'
  He had been flabbergasted at how quickly the
news had travelled. "How do you know?"'
  "All Yoshiwara know-ah! 'portant,
neh?"' Nemi bubbled. "Two day I at
Great House kowtow meet soon oku-san
you."
  "EH?"'
  "'portant, Jami-san. Wen marr'iage?
'Portant, for oku-san, nee goh-san'
frien', neh?"'
  "Are you touched?"' he had burst out.
  She had stared at him without understanding. "Wat for
mad, Jami-san? Oku-san pay now.
Oku-san pay, Jami-san, iy`e?
'portant oku-san nee--"'
  "That's not the way things are done, for God's
sake."
  "No 'unn'stan ... 'portant Nemi go
oku-san ..."
  "You're crazy!"
  "No unn'stan'," she had said sullenly,
appalled at his bellicose manner, deciding
flight was the best defense from this incredible
behavior--but flight of course in tears.
  She was gone before he could stop her, the
mama-san could not convince her to return and so,
furiously, he had stomped home to bed and to little
sleep. God Almighty, Nemi coming
to Struan's to see Maureen? Maureen's to pay
Nemi in future? Important for mistress and
wife to be good friends? God in Heaven! I must
have misunderstood.
  No you bloody didn't. That's what she
bloody said.
  Eventually, he had come to the office. Before
dawn. Bloody hell, he had thought all
morning and now he had two bloody women to contend
with. "Look, Maureen, I'm sorry I
lied," he said lamely, "but ... well, I
don't quite know what else to say."
  "Dinna' fash' yoursel', these things happen."
She smiled.
  "Eh? You're not pis--sorry, you're not
angry?"
  "Nay, laddie, no' this time," she said so
nicely, "no' till we've had a wee chat."
  There was no threat in her voice or manner that
he could detect, she still held his arm tenderly
yet his innermost being screamed danger and for God's
sake hold your tongue, say nothing, "Wee
chat?" he heard himself ask.
  "Aye." Then there was a deafening silence even
though the wind was clattering roof shingles and
shutters, church bells, steam whistles from the
harbor, dogs barking.
  Hold your tongue, two can play in this
negotiation, he cautioned himself. "Aye? What's
that mean?"
  Maureen was feeling her way carefully,
enjoying the learning--and teaching--process. This was
merely the first of a never-ending series of
confrontations.
  "All men are dreadful, Maureen," her
mother had said, amongst other counsel. "Some
worse than others, they're all liars though a
canny wife can always see through her man's lies.
In the beginning husbands are sweet and send your
head to the stars, their warmth and lovemaking, and
silly little kindnesses. In the beginning.
  "Then come the bairns, the children, and
looking after the home, most always wi'out enough money.
By this time you're inclined to let yoursel' go in
dress an' your hair and person. It's awful
difficult with bairns, and lack of sleep an'
being mortal tired, so soon thy man's turns
his back in bed, begins to snore, aye, that's na'
a wee difficulty if you canna' learn
to close your ears tight. Then they go awenching ...
but dinna' fash' yoursel', it's a temporary
game for them an' willna' last, and if you're a
canny wife, thy man will always come back, you've
always got the bairns, and you've got God.
Remember it's no' an easy task to earn the
daily bread, as he should remember it's also no'
an easy task to raise bairns and keep the
home cozy, but they never will remember.
  "Thy father, he's nay different with his women
or woman in India, but he's home now and his
problem's different, I should have known he was already
wedded to his Regiment when we wedded. At least
this Jamie, he's no' in the Services, that's
terrible hard for a wife to compete against."
  "How do you become a canny wife, Ma?"'
  "I wish I knew, lassie, I wish, but
some rules are certain: choose thy man
cannily, a good hold on thy tongue will help,
a good stiff broom and a wild temper if used
shrewdly will help, lots of understanding and forgiveness
all the time, and a warm soft bosom for the poor wee
laddie to cry on ..."
  "Wee chat?" she heard Jamie say again,
his voice choked, and she almost laughed aloud.
  She kept her smile and demeanor forgiving, the
broomstick and temper ready in case. "I
learned about the Yoshiwara on the boat." She
left that hanging and he snapped up the bait.
  "Gornt told you? Or Hoag? It was him?
That idiot."
  "No, it was your fine Captain Strongbow--and
Dr. Hoag's no idiot, lad. I asked
Strongbow how you all managed to stop from going mad
without lady friends, was it the same as in India, or
China?" She laughed remembering how difficult
it had been to get him to talk openly. Wusky's
wonderful, she thought, blessing her father for teaching her
to drink, when necessary. "I think your Yoshiwara's very
sensible."
  He was going to say, You do? This time he said
nothing. Her silence tortured him. When she was
ready she said, "Tomorrow's Sunday."
  His head reeled, unprepared for the non
sequitur. "Yes I, yes, I suppose,
yes it's Sunday, why?"
  "This afternoon I thought we could go to the Reverend
Tweet, I hope he's not as silly as his name,
and we should ask him to publish the banns."
  He blinked. "What?"
  "Aye, banns, Jamie." She laughed.
"You've no' forgotten banns must be read three
consecutive Sundays, have you?"
  "No but I told you I'd written and said
th--"
  "That was when I was there, I'm no' there
anymore I'm here and I love you," she said and
stopped and looked up at him and saw he was fine
and what she desired in life and, all at once,
her control went with the wind, "Jamie darlin',
we're engaged and I believe we should marry because
I will make the best wife a man ever had, I
promise I promise I promise and not just because
I'm here, I've loved thee from the first moment and
now is a grand time to marry, I know it, I'll go
back, back to Scotland and never ... if you
want me to go back I will, by the next boat, but
I love you, Jamie. I swear I'll leave
if you want me to." Tears sprang into her
eyes and she brushed them aside. "Sorry, it's
just the wind, laddie." But it wasn't the wind,
all guile vanished, her spirit open and naked for
him to see. "I just love you, Jamie ..." His
arms went around her and she buried her head in his
shoulder feeling more terrible than she had ever been,
desperate for his love, tears pouring.
  When her terror had abated, pushed by his
warmth, she heard him saying nice things to her,
mixed with the wind and the surf, that he loved her and
wanted her to be happy and not to worry and be sad
but this afternoon would be too soon, he had so much work
to do for the company, that it was going to be hard to start it
and keep it alive.
  "Dinna' worry about the new company business,
Jamie, Mrs. Struan said that she'd--" She
stopped, horrified. She had not intended to tell
him but it was too late now as his arms tightened and
then held her away from him.
  "She "said what"?"
  "It doesna' matter. Let's ..."
  "What did she say to you? What!" His face
was grim, eyes penetrating. "She told you she
was sending me money?"
  "No, no she didna', she said, she just said you
were a good trader and you'd be a success. Let's
eat, I'm starv--"
  "What did she say? Exactly."
  "I told you. Let's have lu--"
  "Tell me what she said, by God. Tell the
truth, exactly! She told you about the money,
didn't she?"
  "No, no' exactly." She looked away,
angry at herself.
  "The truth!" He held her shoulders.
"Now!"
  "All right." She took a deep breath and in
a gathering rush said, "It was this way, Jamie,
exactly. When I went to Struan's, to the
Edifice on the promenade, to ask where you'd be,
if you were in the Japans or where, I was told
to wait and then she sent for me, Mrs. Struan
did, to the great office overlooking all Hong
Kong, but such a sadness to her and such strength,
poor lady. Let me be a moment."
  Again she dried her eyes and took out a
handkerchief and blew her nose and then, not knowing
what to do with her hands put her arm in his and her hand
found its way into his coat pocket. "Let's
walk, Jamie, easier to talk walking, it's
cold. Mrs. Struan asked me to sit down and
told me you'd been dismissed and I asked why and
she told me and I told her that was no' fair,
no' your problem that her son was a wee devil and
crazy in love with an unacceptable adventuress
called Angelique--I don't know about
adventuress but having seen Angelique,
Jamie, I can understand why her son or any man
would be in love with her, and having met his Ma I
understand why there was anger between them ..."
  A gust pulled at their hats and they held on
to them, then she went on, "We ... we had a
row, dinna forget this was days before we heard about his
death. It was a terrible row, Jamie. Soon we
were both on our feet and I'm afraid I lost
my temper, you'd have been ashamed of me and I
used some terrible words of my Da'."
  He stopped and gaped at her. "You had a row
with Tess?"
  "Aye, never in my life so bad, not even with
my sisters and brother in secret. I was na' very
brave about it, but her unfairness made me
angry and it spilled out and I gave her ..."
Maureen's good nature and sense of
humor returned and she laughed nervously.
"Och, it was a Glasgow cat fight, like two
fishwives at the docks, ready to tear each
other's hair out. At one time someone came in and
she threw them out and ... So, Miss Ross? she
said, lips like a gillie's dirk, both of us
panting and no' at all friendly, What do you think
I should do? Do? I said, First you give Mr.
McFay a handsome parting bonus he's earned a
dozen times over during his years of service, you
give him business to start his business and you write
him a nice note."
  "You said that? To Tess?"
  "Aye, I did." She saw and heard the
disbelief and dispelled that instantly. "I swear
this's the God's truth, Jamie, I swear
it. I was no' going to tell you but you insisted and I
wouldna' lie. By the Lord God, I swear this's
the truth!"
  "Yes, sorry. Please go on."
  "Dinna be sorry, laddie, I didna'
believe it mysel' at the time. After I said my
piece, not kindly at all, Mrs. Struan
laughed, she laughed and said, sit down. All right
but no nice note. That's no' good enough, I
said. What's fair compensation? I asked. Her
smile vanished and she said, A thousand guineas.
She spat it out just like Da' when he's in a
rage. Poppycock, by God, says I. Ten
thousand." Maureen stopped and looked at him
searchingly. "I had to settle for five. Was that
all right? I dinna' know if that was enough, is it?"
  "You settled? You settled for five?"
  "Aye, it took time and more curse words ... that
night I asked God's forgiveness for the curses,
more of my Da's words. I hope that was fair,
Jamie, along with extra business ... and she
did agree no bad acts, to be business friends,
I thought that important. After she agreed, she
threw in a free passage with her icy smile,
Go find your Mr. McFay with my compliments."
Maureen glanced at the surf a moment,
collecting her thoughts. Another little nervous
shrug, then she stared up at him, artlessly.
"That's what happened, but it was for you, no' for me
or for us, for you, I didna' mean to mention it."
  "Jamie! More'ssross." Lunkchurch had
reeled out of his office and was standing with them before they
knew it. He greeted them effusively, nearly
asphyxiating her with the smell of
whisky, invited them to dinner that night and reeled
away.
  "He's always drunk by two o'clock, but he's
all right," Jamie said. "He won't remember
the invitation or our refusal." This time he took
her hand and put it in his coat pocket for warmth and
held it and walked on. "Maureen I th--"
  "Before you say another word, let me finish. I
didna' mean to tell you about her and me, it
slipped out. I'm deeply sorry, I swear
to God I didna' mean to tell you, God's
truth, no' when we were talking, serious, about ...
talking about us, you and me. Please believe that,
God's truth."
  "I believe you, I do, no need to worry on
that score, and Tess wrote to me, kept her
word, sent the money, more than I've had in my
whole life, enough to start and all because of you."
  Tears of remorse began, "'no because of me,
Jamie, you'd been wronged and Mrs. Struan
owed it to you--I would no' have told you but, but you
wanted me to. And you were right to be angry, I was
wrong to say, This afternoon, please forgive me, it was
just ... you're right, this afternoon is too soon, you're
right and I was wrong to suggest that. Can we wait,
Jamie, please? Can we wait, say a week
or two, a month, see how you like me?
Please?"
  "Now you listen," Jamie said and gave her hand
a squeeze, "I like you too much as it is and no,
I don't want you to go and yes, we will wait a
little while and no, I'm not angry, and yes, I
believe you and thank you with all my heart and no,
you weren't wrong to make a suggestion. Let's
think about it and talk over dinner, Sparkles, just
you and me, eh?"
  Before she knew what she was doing she reached up
and kissed him in thanks, the use of her nickname
a harbinger of joyous portent. Her hand went
back to his and both into his pocket. "You're
bonnie, Jamie, that's the truth and I love you
and ..." She was going to add, And you dinna have
to say that until you're ready. But she did not.
She withdrew from that precipice. "You're a
bonnie laddie."
  "And you're a bonnie lassie," he said, more
calm about her than he had been for years, the ache
and guilt no longer to the fore. What about
marriage? he asked himself, for the first time without a
shudder. Absolutely a man should be
married and have children, at the correct time. I'm not
opposed to marriage, far from it. When? When the
business has settled and we're in profit?
She's terrific, clever, good-looking, good
family, patient and faithful and loves me,
incredible that she stood up to Tess and did what
she did, show's how smart she is. It might
work. Do I love her? I like her enormously
...
  I'm thirty-nine. And trim and fit, and should
be married--should have married before. She's
twenty-eight, young for her age too, so she must
know her own mind, and there's no doubt she
sparkles.
  Last night Marlowe and Pallidar noticed
too, noticed a little too much! That randy bastard
Settry wouldn't leave her alone, not that I
minded--one little jerk of my head and the darling came
a-running. He squeezed her arm, liking that.
  "What?"
  "Nothing. I'm glad you enjoyed the party last
night," he said but he was thinking, in three or
four months, no need to hurry, not a bad
idea. "Here we are."
  They turned into the clubhouse forecourt.
MacStruan was talking to Dmitri on the steps
and he saw them look up and Dmitri waved
cheerily. The ice slammed back into his guts.
Nemi! When Nemi gets the bit between her teeth
...
  God Almighty, he thought aghast, how the
hell do I cope with Nemi, the Yoshiwara and
Sparkles? Can't be done. Must be done. What
was it she said about the Yoshiwara? She wasn't
pissed off this time ... "no' till we've had
a wee chat." Chat?
  "Are you cold, Jamie darling?"
  "No, no, just fine."

  "Phillip, tell Captain Abeh again,
I'm sorry but Hiraga cannot at the moment be
found." Sir William stood with his back to the
fireplace in one of the Legation reception
rooms, Tyrer, Babcott and Abeh just arrived
from Yedo. It was dusk. "We're still looking
everywhere. And Phillip, wipe that smug look
off your face, do you really want to irritate
him?"
  Abeh was angered. So was Sir William.
He had done everything he could, the
Settlement had been combed and soldiers were again
going through Drunk Town and the village. The
Yoshiwara was more difficult. Weapons were not
allowed, access to Inns was almost impossible without
breaking and entering, a hideous idea and bound
to create an international incident. If he did
it, then samurai at their Gates would insist on
the same right. In the beginning of the Settlement it
had been agreed, so long as there was no rioting, the
Yoshiwara was to be left alone to float and
to serve.
  "He says he cannot go back without Hiraga and
Hiraga was promised to Lord Yoshi today."
  Sir William bit back the oath. Instead
he said sweetly, "Please ask him to wait.
At the guard house. Surely Hiraga will be
found soon, if he is still here."
  "He says, Still here? If not here, where is
he?"
  "If I knew I would certainly fetch him for
Lord Yoshi. Perhaps he has escaped, to Yedo
or Kanagawa or somewhere." Even Sir
William was shocked at the black rage in
Abeh's face who spat out some Japanese,
turned on his heel and stomped out.
  "Rude bugger!"
  "He said, Hiraga had better be found,
Sir William." Tyrer rubbed his unshaven
face, feeling filthy and anxious to have a bath,
massage and siesta before Fujiko. Most of his
fatigue had immediately dissolved by the joyous news
that Hiraga was not locked up and in irons. "Have
to feel sorry for Abeh, sir. He can't go
back without Nak--without Hiraga, more than his
life's worth."
  "Well, that's his problem. Have you any idea
where Nakama would be?"
  "No sir, if he's not in the village or the
Yoshiwara."
  "You might try and find out, obviously it's
important." Sir William looked up at
Babcott. "Now, more important. George,
the patient? Was it Anjo?"
  "Yes."
  "Tallyho! Phillip, you look exhausted,
no need for you to wait, we can talk later.
George can fill me in. If
Nakama-Hiraga appears you bloody clap
him in irons at once. At once!"
  "Yes sir, thank you sir. Before
I go, can I ask what happened in Hong
Kong?" The moment they had arrived both had
asked, noticing anxiously that Prancing
Cloud had returned, but Sir William had
said, First Abeh.
  "It's all quiet in Hong Kong, all
quiet here, thank God." He told them about the
funeral, Hoag returning and why. "The
reason's supposed to be confidential but it's
common knowledge. So it's a waiting game, Tess is
waiting, it seems Angelique has agreed
to wait, so Hoag says, not that she can do much
else. She is, or she's not."
  Babcott said, "If she's not she'll know in
a few days. And so will we."
  "Christ," Tyrer muttered. "What happens:
if she is or if she's not?"
  Sir William shrugged. "We have to wait
too. Now off you go, Phillip. Whisky or
brandy, George? Do you mind bringing me
up-to-date now--you're not too tired?"
  "No." The two men were alone. "Brandy,
please. Yedo was very interesting."
  "Health! And?"
  "Health. Before Yedo, do we know more about Hong
Kong?"
  Sir William smiled. The men were old
friends, and Babcott Deputy Minister. "It
went perfectly. Yes. Tess wrote
privately to thank me. Most of it I can tell
you now: Hoag brought three letters for
Angelique, she doesn't know this by the way.
One Hoag gave her at once and told me there
was no noticeable reaction one way or the other,
no clue, he presumed it was just asking her
to wait. Tess confirmed the contents of that letter
to me, that she proposed a lull until it was
established if Angelique was pregnant or
not. If Angelique has her period, he
gives her one letter, if not he waits to the
second month to make sure and he gives her the
other. Hoag swore he does not know the contents,
nor did Tess reveal them in her letter to me."
  He sipped his whisky, his face set. "One
issue Tess wrote that, I'm afraid,
indicates her thinking: Struan's solicitors
are drafting a brief to nullify in court, the
"Ludicrous Ceremony"--she puts that in
caps--whatever the legality or illegality,
whatever the pregnancy result, and
to contest any will if one is found there or in the
Japans."
  "My God! Poor Angelique ... how
awful!"
  "An emphatic yes to that. My letter asking for
forbearance had no effect. Bloody, eh?" Sir
William stalked to his desk and brought out a
dispatch. "This is what I really wanted to discuss
--highly confidential of course."
  Babcott turned up the oil lamp.
Daylight was fading fast. The Governor of Hong
Kong wrote formally:

My dear Sir William, thank you for your
dispatch of the 13th. I'm afraid it's not
possible to send extra troops at the moment. I
have just heard from London that all troops are
needed elsewhere, that budgetary considerations
preclude raising new levies in India or
elsewhere so you will have to do with what you have. However, I
am sending another 20-gun, sailing frigate,
H.m.s. Avenger, on temporary loan.
Rest assured if there is a major attack on
Yokohama, in due course the attack will be
punished.
  I am instructed by London to inform you of the
following directives for immediate prudent action: you
will collect the indemnity demanded, together with
possession of the murderers (or witness their trial
and execution), you will punish and bring to heel the
petty tyrant responsible, Sanjiro of
Satsuma. I am to advise you further that the
Naval and Army forces you presently have at your
disposal are considered more than adequate to deal with
one petty princeling.

  Babcott whistled tonelessly. At length he
said, "They're a bunch of idiots, the whole
bloody lot."
  Sir William laughed. "I rather thought the
same. But having said that, what do you think?"
  ""Immediate prudent action"? That's a
negation."
  "Diplomatic verbiage to cover their tails,
obviously."
  "We have the indemnity, we ..."
  "The bullion was advanced on Sanjiro's
behalf. It was a loan not a payment by the guilty
party."
  "True. And both murderers are
dead, probably."
  "Yes, by chance and not one hundred percent
certain and not as punishment for the crime."
  "Well yes. We ..." Babcott looked
at him and sighed. "What do I think? Between us I
think you've already decided to launch a punitive
strike against Sanjiro, probably at
Kagoshima, particularly as Yoshi gave you
tacit approval."
  "Possible approval. Is the dispatch and are
my answers enough to convince Ketterer a strike, if
any, is authorized?"
  "No doubt about that, they've given you
directives. The dispatch clearly makes it
obligatory, however stupid and however much I
disapprove of it."
  "Because you're a doctor?"
  "Yes."
  "If you ever have to take charge, George, I
hope you'll forget that you are."
  "You don't have to say that, William. I know
which side my butter is breaded. Meanwhile
Put not your trust in princes, bureaucrats
or generals they will plead expedience while
spilling your blood from a safe distance." He
raised his glass. "To London. Christ, I'm
tired."
  "Meanwhile remember that Machiavelli also
said, The safety of the State is the overriding
duty of the ruler, or some such platitude." His
eyes crinkled. "Now Anjo."
  Babcott told him. And being asked, gave his
considered diagnosis. "Six months. A year,
no more. Subject to my tests."
  "Interesting." Sir William thought long and
hard. Outside night had settled, the fleet
bedding down. He closed the curtains against the
drafts, went over to the fire and poked a
blaze. "Putting that aside for the moment, my
inclination is to order an immediate naval presence off
Kagoshima, immediate bombardment if Sanjiro
gives us no satisfaction--as much for Yoshi's
benefit, Anjo and his Council of Elders as for
scallywag Sanjiro, especially Yoshi."
  "Sending the fleet there leaves the Settlement
naked. What about the reports of samurai
quietly surrounding us--we saw a great number
around the Tokaid@o."
  "That's the risk."
  Babcott looked back at Sir
William steadily and said no more. The decision was
not his. He would happily obey like everyone
else, insisting on being part of the expedition. He
got up. "Think I'll nap before dinner,
didn't sleep much last night. By the way,
Phillip did a cracking good job. I'll
start my tests later and let you know."
  "Do you want to have a late bite to eat? Nine
o'clock? Good, and thanks for Anjo, that's very
important. That makes Yoshi even more
important. If he can be trusted. If."
  "In this land that's a major problem." Then
Babcott said, still sickened by Tess's
attitude, "Rotten about the "court case."
That's going to be messy for Angelique, so
unfair, isn't it?"
  "Has life ever been fair, old man?"

  At dinnertime, Angelique knocked on the
tai-pan's office door, dressed to go out.
"Albert?"
  "Come in! I say, I love your hat." It
was an elegant dinner hat, discreet, still
suitable for mourning, dark blue, yet made chic
with a few silk flowers she had tucked into the band.
  "Thank you. You're working late."
  "Part of the job." Like everyone else he
wondered what was in the letter Tess had written
to her, wild rumors around the Settlement, from
ordering her to get out of Asia to charging her with
murder. There was no sign on her face, only
a becoming melancholy.
  In his own letter Tess had cautioned him to be
wary about making commitments on armaments, and if
proposed, to keep them very confidential. To use
McFay if need be.

I have asked him to cooperate with you. Of course
his main interest will be to promote his own business but
you are to treat him as friendly. Now that Mr. Edward
Gornt has assumed control of Brocks in
Japan, he is enemy--be careful of him,
he's more cunning than we presumed. As to that other
person, Dr. Hoag has agreed to assist me.
I understand she still occupies quarters in our house
granted by my son. You will be informed later of new
arrangements.

  "Where are you dining? French Legation?" he
asked.
  "I accepted to sup next door with Mr.
Gornt." She saw his face harden. "It was a
last-minute supper invitation with mutual friends,
Dmitri, Marlowe. He asked me to ask you
to join us to, to escort me if you would--are you
free?"
  "Sorry, can't, glad to take you to the door and
to call for you but that's Brock and Sons, he's the
head of it and this's the Noble House."
  "You should be friends, you could still be competitors.
He really was my husband's friend, and mine, and
Jamie's."
  "Sorry, it's my problem not yours." He
smiled again. "Come on." He took her arm, not
bothering about a coat and they went into the cold. The
wind tugged at her hat but did not displace it.
She had secured it with a chiffon scarf.
  "Evening, Ma'am." The guard on Brock's
door bowed.
  "Evening. Thank you, Albert, no need to come
and fetch me, one of the others will see me home,
off you go or you'll catch cold." He laughed and
was gone. In the same moment Gornt was there
to greet her.
  "'evening Ma'am, my but you look smashing."
  Now, as he accepted her wrap, her worries
began to well up again. What trumps? A burst
of laughter came from an inner room. She
recognized Marlowe, saw that the guard had gone
and there were no servants about and they were alone for the
moment. "Edward," she whispered, her concern
overcoming her caution, "why are you so sure
I'll be all right?"
  "Tess invited me back. Don't worry,
it's in control. Better we talk during your
promenade tomorrow--tonight is only for good conversation
amongst friends, gentle pleasure. I'm truly
honored you accepted my invitation--it's due to you
I'm head here." Gornt took her arm and in a
normal voice said, "Welcome to Brock and
Sons, Angelique. Shall we go in?"
  The dining room was as big as the one in
Struan's, as lush, the silver as good, the wine
superior, the linen richer. Liveried Chinese
servants. Marlowe, Pallidar and Dmitri
stood in front of a roaring fire, waiting
to greet her. They kissed her hand, admired her
hat that she kept on as was custom, Marlowe and
Pallidar in their informal uniforms. And while she
greeted them and listened with her quiet
charm, her inner motor was sifting Gornt, what
he had said and what was missing.
  "Shall we sit now that our honored guest is
gracing us?" Gornt settled her at one end of the
table. He took the other. The table was small enough
to be intimate, large enough to be impressive.
"Suhs, a toast!" he said, lifting his glass
of champagne, "To the Lady!" They drank and his
eyes never left hers. An invitation,
discreetly given. She smiled back, neither yes
nor no.
  Plenty of time, he thought, delighted to be the
host and even more delighted with himself. So much left
to tell. Perhaps the best part. But not to her.
  On the last day in Hong Kong, Tess
Struan had again sent for him, secretly.
"I've been through all the papers, Mr.
Gornt. It's not absolutely certain the
support the papers give your scheme will bring about
the Brock crash."
  "I think they will, Ma'am," he said,
impressed that she knew so much about business.
"I truly believe you have everything needed
to unlock Pandora's Box"--this was the code name
they had agreed on. "There's one last piece
of the jigsaw that would complete the picture and
guarantee success."
  "And that is?"'
  "Norbert's official chop. It's in his
safe at Yokohama."
  She had sighed and leaned back in the carved
chair. No need for either of them to articulate that this
chop on almost any Brock letterheaded document,
correctly couched and dated validated it,
committing Brock's of Yokohama through him
to whatever was on the paper.
  No need to say aloud that all kinds of
incriminating information could be written now,
backdated, and found or slid surreptitiously
into the pile. Who could challenge such a letter with
Greyforth dead?
  Both of them knew its value.
  Morgan and Tyler Brock had speculated
heavily on this complicated but incredibly ingenious
scheme to corner the Hawaiian sugar market--
in principle already accomplished--bartering the
sugar crop forward for Southern cotton which they had
presold legally to guaranteed French interests--
historic U.s. allies and not subject
to Northern blockade in this instance
through certain congressional help and safeguards--
then to be shipped legally from France to Geneva,
to be sent on legally to Lancashire cotton
mills that were almost destitute and desperate for the
raw material.
  A tiny hazard: If the Union government
discovered for certain the ultimate destination--
Britain was formally neutral, most of the British
were actively pro-Confederate--and this was made
public knowledge, they would inhibit the export
by interception. This was a minor risk because of
high-level agreement to the French connection which
was, for the first time, proven by Gornt's papers
to be a Brock company shell, and governmental
noninterference more certain because a goodly proportion
of the sugar, also desperately needed, was to be
bartered for diverted Union armaments which Brocks
would promptly import to Asia. Projected
profits were immense. Brock's standing in the
Asia-America entente would become preeminent,
whoever won the civil war. In Asia they would be
supreme. And no possible way the plan could
fail because the Victoria Bank of Hong Kong
was the underwriter.
  The bank, biggest in the Colony, had
eagerly underpinned the venture, approved by the
Board of twelve of whom Tyler Brock was
one, with Brock and Sons shares and liquidity as
nominal collateral. For all intents and
purposes the Victoria was a Brock
preserve. Old Man Brock had been a
founder in '43, he had chosen the other members--
excluding any director of Struan's
perpetually from the Board--had retained a forty
percent interest and had permanent voting control of
at least nine to three. And while backing
Brock's on the international scene, the Board
had meanwhile agreed to crush Struan's through
repossession of all Struan's debt paper,
due by January 30th--the timetable and questionable
methods of the clandestine, long-term acquisition was
also tabled in Gornt's evidence.
  Gornt had excitedly pointed out that, for the first
time Brock and Sons were vulnerable--never before had
they put up the control of their company as
collateral. The Victoria was the key to the
Pandora's Box. The key to the bank was the
Board. It had to be subverted, turned around, and
financial support withdrawn suddenly from Tyler
and Morgan on the correct day leaving
them destitute without the necessary funds to oil the
wheels. Meanwhile evidence of the scheme from
Gornt's papers, and notice that the Victoria
would not be supporting the deal any longer, had to be
rushed by clipper to Washington to the right hands which would
make interception probable--without the Bank's
backing there was no sugar to barter for cotton or for
armaments. But this had to be done now, before
rearranging the Bank's voting control.
  How to turn the Board was the pivot of
Gornt's plan.
  The papers revealed highly embarrassing
facts on the background of two pro-Tyler
Brock Board members, so serious that their
votes would go to whoever had the documentation. Seven
to five. More facts about one other man, less
damaging and questionable were also there. A possible six
to six.
  Gornt's idea was that Tess should approach the
chairman privately, give him the facts,
tell him that details of the scheme were already en
route to Washington, and propose, "That they
pull the plug on Brock's and swing to you and
Struan's, granting an extension of six months
on Struan debts, two seats on the Board,
take immediate control of Brock's and sell off the
assets at bargain prices, enough to cover debts,
leaving Tyler and Morgan Brock to drown in
sugar they can't pay for. And last the Bank
agrees to split Brock's forfeited forty
percent bank holdings into four parts: one to the
chairman, one to two Board members of his
choice, one to the Noble House."
  "In return for what? Why should the Bank
cross Tyler?"' Tess had asked.
"Double-cross, isn't that the American word?"'
  "Yes, Ma'am, but this would be a
triple-cross. Why should the Board gorge on
the deal? Because they'll be huge winners, the
chairman and all of them, because they hate Tyler
privately and fear him, like everyone else. They
don't hate you, you're the Noble House and no
threat to them. Hate, not money alone, is the
grease that oils the world."
  "I don't agree, but let that pass.
Back to this mythical chop. What do you propose
to do with it?"' Her smile had been cynical.
"If you obtain it."
  "Anything you like, Ma'am."
  "Perhaps you should bring it here
by Prancing Cloud."
  "No, sorry, that's too soon, unless
you'll leave her to wallow for a week or two.
I'll bring it in good time."
  "Why delay? Send it, Strongbow's
trustworthy."
  "I'll bring it in good time." He
remembered how her eyes, so pale and seemingly
so innocent most times, penetrated like molten
iron. "I promise."
  "Put that aside for the moment. The price,
Mr. Gornt?"'
  "I would like to tell you that when I return,
Ma'am."
  She had laughed without humor. "I'm sure
you would. I thought you knew me well enough by now not
to try to squeeze me or Struan's. You could
delay till the last moment, by which time I will have had
to launch the assault, on both Tyler and the
Bank, Struan's would be terribly exposed and
I would have to agree, whatever you demand."
  "There must be trust on both sides. I've
given you the evidence you need to crush Tyler
Brock and Morgan, for a deal you promise me
in the future, I'm trusting you to deliver,
Ma'am. It's not much to ask to delay, I swear
I'll be back in good time. What I would bring from
Yokohama is the icing on the cake and the price
will be fair."
  "I've never liked cake, or icing, Mr.
Gornt--any liking was beaten out of me by my father
who disapproved of such vittles when I was very young.
The price?"'
  "May I assure you, Ma'am, it will be a
price you will gladly pay, on my honor and my
word as a gentleman."
  She had looked at him. "May I assure
you, Mr. Gornt, equally, if you cross, or
double-cross or triple-cross me, I will see
you will be an extremely unhappy man, apart from
being persona non grata in Asia and throughout the
Empire--on my honor and my word as
tai-pan of the Noble House ..."

  Gornt went cold, remembering the way
Tess's words had surrounded him, the pride with which
she had said tai-pan of the Noble House even when
she added, "however temporary." All at
once he realized that this woman really was
tai-pan now, realized whoever held the
title soon would not hold the power. Realized with a
stab of fear that he would have to deal with her for a long
time, that by destroying Brock's perhaps he had
created a monster for his own destruction.
  God in Heaven, she can blow me to pieces at
her whim! How do I make her an ally, keep
her ally? She's got to be my ally, whatever
the cost.
  Then laughter from Dmitri and Marlowe brought
him back. His world came into balance again.
Candlelight, dining table, fine silver, fine
friends. Secure in Yokohama, the chop already
removed from the safe and hidden away, a letter already
written, backdated and chopped that corroborated
the loose evidence against the key Board member,
another letter implying collusion of the chairman.
Without them the Board will collapse into our laps like
a bent house of cards, has to, they won't
resist their one and only chance of revenge on
Tyler and Morgan Brock. And no need to fear
Tess Struan. She's in my power as much as my
future's in hers.
  I've a lot to be pleased about. Here I am,
twenty-seven, Morgan's head is almost in the
basket, I'm tai-pan of
Rothwell-Gornt's-to-be, head of a
splendid table, servants waiting for orders. And
she's there, beautiful, rich-to-be, and loving me
however much she tries to hide it, my
bride-to-be whatever the outcome--a child
by Malcolm only makes the price higher
to Tess, a sumptuous but bargain price she will
gladly pay!
  "Health and a long one," he toasted silently,
raising his glass to Angelique and to himself and to them
both together, sure his future was limitless.
  His guests did not notice the private
toast, too involved in chattering, vying for her
attention. Comfortably he watched them. Mostly
he watched her. Then he tapped the table.
  "Angelique, gentlemen, your attention
please. We have mulligatawny soup with sherry,
baked fish with onions, olives and iced
Pouilly Fuiss`e, sorbet and champagne,
then the roast with potatoes and St-Emilion--the
cook "found" a fine piece of Struan beef
... don't worry, Ma'am," he said with a
laugh, "it was bought, not stolen. Then chicken pie
and to end, a surprise to end all surprises."
  "And what's that?" Marlowe asked.
  "Wait and see." He glanced at
Angelique.
  She smiled her enigmatic smile, the smile
that excited him so much, like the Mona Lisa he
had seen in the Louvre on a trip to Paris--
never to be forgotten.
  "I think we must trust our host, Captain,"
she said softly. "Don't you agree?"

                 

    Sunday, 11th January:
  In the night Angelique awoke in a cold
sweat, back in time, back in the French
Legation, the mama-san's little bottles on the
side table, one already empty, the other ready
to uncork and swallow as soon as the cramps
began.
  Finding herself warm in bed in her own suite, the
fire coals still glowing, her night light casting
solid shadows, the terror left and her pulse
slowed and she waited for the indications. Nothing. No
cramp or stomachache. Waiting. Still nothing.
Thank God, she thought, I must have dreamed they
had begun. She relaxed in the down mattress,
watching the fire, not quite awake, good pictures in
the coals, happy pictures of the roofs of
Paris in the sunset, melding into the summerscape
of her dream house in Provence, her baby son
contentedly sleeping in her arms. "J@esus,
Marie, please don't let it begin.
Please."
  Yesterday afternoon Babcott had arrived,
"Happened to be passing, and wanted to see how you
were."
  "No need to tell fibs," she said sharply.
"Dr. Hoag said the same thing this morning. The
very same words."
  "Steady on, dear Angelique, I really
did happen to pass by and I really did want
to see you. To reassure you."
  "Oh?"'
  "Yes, old Hoag said you were a little touchy.
Rightly so," he nodded, smiling, "and to tell you
what you didn't give him a moment to say, that
it's quite possible for your monthly to be delayed,
to have slight period cramps that go away to return
properly in a day or so. Or even never
to return."
  "Why is it you doctors are so
wise but know nothing, not really, not even about such a
simple matter as having a baby or not having a
baby, a process which has been with us a few
years," she had fumed, exasperated and weary of
all the sidelong glances of the last few days and the
sudden silences as she walked by. "Kindly
leave me be, both of you, I will inform you when I
need to see you if ever. Leave me alone!"
  He had gone away, chastised, but she did not
care. Since last Sunday's flaming row with Father
Leo she had kept to herself as much as possible.
  "I hate that man," she muttered, "hate him
for upsetting me so much. He's vile, he's no
man of God!"
  During Confession he had said, "Perhaps you should
ask forgiveness for this sham marriage you took part
in, my child, oh I know you were cajoled, tricked.
Even so it's a sin."
  "I wasn't cajoled, Father, and it's not a
sin or a sham," she had said. "It's
perfectly legal according to law."
  "Heretic law? It's false. You blind
yourself. Of course it is not lawful and not valid in
the sight of God."
  "It is in the sight of English law," she
said seething. "It is in the sight of God, it
is!"
  "Ah, my poor child, it's not and you know it's
not. The Church does not recognize a heretic
marriage, let alone by a simple sea
captain. You're not married in the sight of
God."
  "I am, Malcolm's Church recognizes
my marriage, his law does, my husband's law
does. I'm married legally."
  "How foolish you are. Don't blind yourself.
You're Catholic, the True Church does not
recognize such a marriage. Repent, my
child."
  "I'm married and that's the end of it!" She
had got up.
  "Wait! It's not the end, my child, to give you
absolution you must admit your sins, to come before Him
blameless! How can I give you absolution?"'
  "Their God is the same as our God, my
God," she had said, tears of rage and
frustration blinding her, "I can worship him in
their Church as well as here."
  "You risk damnation and Eternal Torment.
Excommunication, the sacraments
withdrawn from you. Beware, your mind has been taken
by the heretics, pray for forgiveness ..."
  She had fled.
  Andr`e and Seratard were in the congregation. Later
Andr`e had asked what the trouble was and she had
told him. He said, "Thousands of Catholics
are happily married under Protestant dogma,
and visa versa, whatever Church hierarchies
claim."
  "Andr`e, am I married or am I not?"'
  "You are, according to British law, and British
naval law, until a British court says you
are not."
  "But not according to the Church?"'
  "To their Church, yes, subject to the above,
to ours, no. You already know the answer to that, no."
  "I hate that man."
  "He's a priest. Not all of them are good,
we both know that too. Listen, Angelique, about
your, your time, please, as soon as you know, one
way or another, please tell me privately
so we can begin to plan. Henri expects any day
to have the French Ambassador's approval that you
are a Ward of the State. Don't worry, I
promised we will guard you and your interests and we
will," he said and left her to brood.
  Not married according to the Church? Then to hell with the
Church of Rome, she had thought, sick with
apprehension. Beware! Never admit that openly,
never. You are French, French people understand about
Catholic Rome, its corruption and heresy and
about misguided popes. Every night in her prayers
she asked, implored the Blessed Mother for guidance
and succor.
  Monday and all the other days dragged, always
eyes and unspoken questions so she went out less and
less. To pass the time she read and slept and read
and wrote letters and began a story about a French
girl who was cast ashore in Yokohama. This
stopped abruptly and she burned the pages as she
started to relive Kanagawa and him and the nights
and days with Malcolm and their one night on
Prancing Cloud.
  Prancing Cloud had left. She had been
glad to see that harbinger of ill wind disappear into the
distance.
  Since her promenade when she had talked again
with Gornt--learning nothing new--by mutual consent
they had decided not to meet for a few days.
Twice she had invited Maureen
Ross to tea, the second time deliberately
receiving her in bed to encourage rumors that she had a
fever. Their chats were gossipy, ordinary, about
fashion, the problems in the Settlement, the life
here, nothing serious. Later these visits would be
fun when they could discuss more intimate matters and
thoughts. Not now. But she liked Maureen who had
brought welcome books and magazines and told
about Jamie's new office, how he was working all
hours, and, shyly, her hope that they would be married
soon.
  The only person she had enjoyed seeing was
Phillip Tyrer. He had been sent by Sir
William with best wishes for a quick recovery,
bringing the latest London papers with him and
presenting her with flowers he had purchased in the
village. "By Orders of Her Majesty's
Government," he had said in French with a
flourish, his boyish grin and joie de vivre
infectious.
  For an hour or more he had chatted, mostly in
French, relating the latest rumors. About his
trip to Yedo, about Nakama-Hiraga who had
vanished without a trace, creating a diplomatic
problem for Sir William, and about his Captain,
Abeh, "who's still waiting and seething at the
North Gate."
  "What's going to happen, Phillip?"'
  "Don't know. We hope the problem's going
to go away. Pity of it is we had to describe
Nakama, what he looks like now so there's not much
chance for him escaping. Damn nuisance, 'cause
he was a fine fellow and he helped me greatly.
I don't believe a word about him being an
assassin. We didn't get a sausage of
info out of the other fellow, Nakama's friend, whose
family are shipbuilders in Choshu. I got
him a look around one of our frigates. Nice
enough fellow but fairly dumb. He knew nothing
about Nakama or would say nothing. Sir
William didn't want to give him to the
Bakufu so he let him go. Damn nuisance,
Angelique, Nakama aided me tremendously
--not only with Japanese, and if it wasn't for
him ..."
  Later they had soup together and at her probing he
had admitted, first swearing her to secrecy, that he
had a girl, a special girl in the
Yoshiwara, "Oh she's so beautiful and nice,
Angelique, I think I can swing the
money for the contract without straining the old
Exchequer, the liaison is so comfortable ..." and
she had been amused how young he seemed, envying
him his simple love, and, compared to him, how
adult and sophisticated she felt.
  "One day I'd like to meet her," she had
said. "I can easily sneak into your Yoshiwara.
I'll dress up as a boy."
  "Oh my God, no, you couldn't.
Angelique, you mustn't."
  It might be amusing to do that, she thought,
chuckling, and turned over in her bed, almost
asleep. Andr`e will take me. I'd like to see this
Hinodeh I've so much invested in. I wonder
how she looks.
  On the threshold of sleep her stomach
spasmed.
  Another cramp, different. Another. Wide
awake now. Apprehensively she rubbed her
stomach and loins to take the ache away but it did
not go away and now she realized for sure it was the
old familiar ache with the slightly bloated
feeling.
  It had begun. The bleeding followed. Andwiththe
flow all of her longing and worry and hoping burst.
In abject grief she began to cry and buried
her head in her pillows, "Oh Malcolm I
had hoped so much, so much, now I've nothing left
to give you, nothing left of you, nothing left
to give you, oh Malcolm Malcolm I'm so
sorry, so awfully sorry ... oh God,
I'm so awfully sorry ... THY will be done
..."
  Crying and crying, after an eternity, crying herself
to sleep, no more tears to shed.

  "Missee, wakee! Missee-tai-tai,
cawfee, heya!"
  In her waking mists Ah Soh banged the
tray on the side table and Angelique smelled
the warm, heavenly smell of fresh-brewed coffee
--a present from Seratard and one of the few
services Ah Soh would and could do properly--
wafting around her, bringing her into the day without hurt.
  She sat up in bed and stretched, astonished and
delighted she felt so alert and so well. The
cramps had gone, the ache had subsided into its
normal pattern, better than usual, the
bloated feeling less than usual.
  And best of all, despair had
left her. It's HER miracle, she thought,
reverently. During the last month in nightly
prayers to the Blessed Mother talking, asking,
pleading, one night exhausted by anxiety, she had
listened. "Leave it to me, child, it is MY
decision not thine," she heard, not hearing with her
ears but with her innermost self, "MY decision,
all of it, rest in peace." The anxiety had
left her.
  It was her decision, how wonderful!
Angelique would accept HER verdict. The Will
of God. And she had.
  Impulsively she knelt beside the bed, closed
her eyes and blessed Her and gave passionate
thanks, and again how sorry she was but thanked her for
lifting the burden, Thy Will Be Done, then slid
again under the covers ready for coffee and the world.
Coffee at this time, nine, was custom on a
Sunday, just enough time to bathe and dress for church.
  Church! Why not? she thought, I must give
proper thanks, but no confession. "Ah Soh,
bring my bath and ..." Ah Soh was staring at
her, glazed. Abruptly she realized her maid
must have seen bloodstains on the back of her
nightdress.
  Hastily Ah Soh said, "I get bar'f,"
and waddled for the door but Angelique was there before
her and pushed her back. "If you tell anyone
I'll scratch your eyes out!"
  "Ayeeyah, no unnerstan'
Missee-tai-tai," Ah Soh grunted,
petrified by the venom on her mistress's face
and in her voice. "No 'unnerstan'!"
  "Oh yes you do! Dew neh loh
moh-ah," she spat out the Cantonese curse
words as she had heard Malcolm use them at
Chen once when he was angry with him and had seen
Chen go white. He had never told her what the
words meant but they had the same effect on Ah
Soh whose legs nearly gave way.
"Ayeeeeeyahhh!"
  "If you talk, Ah Soh, tai-tai will
..." Furiously Angelique stabbed her long
nails to within a millimeter of her eyes and held
them there. "Tai-tai do this! Understand?"
  "'unnerstan! Sek'ret, tai-tai!" The
frightened woman moaned some Cantonese, put
fingers to her lips parodying a clamp. "Ah
Soh no talk 'unnerstan'!"
  Getting hold of her fury though her
heart was still racing, Angelique pushed the woman
towards the bed and got into it again. Imperiously she
pointed at the coffee cup. "Dew neh loh
moh! Pour my coffee!"
  Saturated with humility and genuine fear, Ah
Soh poured the coffee and handed it to her and stood
there meekly.
  "No talk, make all bed, clothes, clean.
Secret!"
  "'unnerstan' tai-tai, no talk,
sek'ret, 'unnerstan'."
  "No talk! Or ..." Her nails slashed
the air. "Bath!"
  Ah Soh scuttled away to get the hot
water but first, breathlessly to whisper the news to Chen
whose eyes would turn to heaven and he would say,
"ayeeyah, what will Tai-tai Tess do
now," on the run to speed the news on the fastest
ship to Illustrious Compradore Chen who had
commanded them to inform him at once, irrespective
of cost.
  The coffee was delicious. It soothed her
stomach and spirit and took away the slight
tumescence. One of Angelique's true joys
in all the world was early morning coffee, most of
all with croissants and Colette on the
Champs-Elys`ees at one of the elegant
street caf`es, reading the latest Court
Circular and watching the world stroll by.
  First church. I will pretend that nothing has
happened yet--Ah Soh won't dare to say
anything. Who to tell first? Hoag? Andr`e?
Edward? Mr. Skye?
  She had already had a discussion with Heavenly
Skye. His advice was that they had no option but
to wait, to see what Hoag would do, and after that,
what Tess would do. Tess's letter to him had been
brief: Dear Mr. Skye: I know my son
had dealings with you. Cease and desist in our
affairs, my son's and mine. No good will come of
it.
  "Interesting choice of words," he had commented.
  "You sound afraid, as though we've lost
already."
  "Not at all, Angelique. Our only
posture can be to wait. She has the
initiative."
  "By the next mail I want you to write
to Struan's solicitors, asking for an accounting
of my husband's estate." This had
been an idea Andr`e had given her, favoring
opening of an immediate offensive.
  "Gladly, if you want to fall into her
trap."
  "What?"'
  "Your only posture is the aggrieved,
wronged child-widow who was enticed into an early
marriage by a strong-willed man--not the
impoverished, rapacious widow of a rich husband,
a profligate minor, who had gone against his mother's
wishes in marrying an impoverished lady of questionable
antecedents--please don't be angry, I
only tell you what can, may and probably will be
said. You must wait, dear lady, pretending
to hope that Tess will behave like a human being should.
If his child was, er, is en route, that would be a
great assist."
  "And if there isn't?"'
  "Let us consider that when it happens, I mean
when it doesn't. Lots of time to con--"'
  "I don't have lots of time. I will run out of
money."
  "Be patient ..."
  Mon Dieu, patience! Men and their
patience.
  Now that Angelique knew beyond doubt she was not
bearing Malcolm's child, she set aside all the
ideas she had formulated in the event of a baby and
concentrated on the other set.
  An immediate onslaught on that woman? No, that
comes later, Mr. Skye's right in that. I have
to find out what she is going to do first. To do that I have
to tell Hoag or Babcott. Hoag delivered
her message so he will have to be the one. No need
to have him paw me, either of them. I can tell him.
At once or later? Is it worth asking
Andr`e, or Edward? I don't think so.
  Having no baby to contend with, to consider, makes
my life simpler, my chances of remarriage
better. Whatever happens, like every girl in the world,
I must have a protector, the right husband--or,
at length, any husband.
  As to my prospects: I don't have money enough
to get back to Paris to set myself up there. I've
no prospects except through a settlement with
Struan's--no, not with the company, with that woman.
Even Edward is tied up in that. Especially
him. Without a good settlement for me, and her
benevolence on his deal, his marriage interest will
evaporate. That's fair because mine will
evaporate quicker. He's in love with me, I'm
not in love with him though I like him a lot, but without
mutual financial security the connection has
no logic.
  Always back to that woman, whatever idea comes
up, Angelique thought, not a little pleased with the
way her mind was working, coolly logically, not
worrying, simply examining all aspects as a
prudent woman should.
  I can last a month or two, no more--if I
don't give any more money to Andr`e. Soon my
chits will run out, any day Albert can get
orders to stop my credit and throw me out. I can
almost read her spiteful mind. Never mind, I can
move to the French Legation. But they won't
support me for very long.
  Sir William? No reason for him to do more
than he has. Andr`e is the only one outside
her grasp who can help. Think clearly,
Angelique, that's wrong! When Andr`e sees that
the money is drying up or has dried up, no
telling what he may do in desperation. He could
sell Tess that awful paper, he could give her
proof about the ... about the past. He's a cynic,
callous enough or clever enough to have kept proof I paid
for the medicine with the earrings I lost. He'd
settle for much less money than I would. Even
so he's the only man here evil enough to combat her.
Edward will go against her but only up to a point.
He won't lose Rothwell-Gornt.
  Should I get Edward to go back to Hong Kong
at once? Or Hoag, he's a friend, a sort
of friend and he's the one she sent to me? Or
Andr`e? Not him for then I wouldn't sleep a
moment knowing he was in Hong Kong with that woman,
unwatched.

  For her church was a huge success, even with her
melancholy. She had dressed as usual in
black, a medium veil covered her hat and
face. Prayerbook in hand she had set out on the
blustery day, and when she passed the Catholic
church on the promenade, joining the throng that headed
for Holy Trinity, and went up its path and entered
the church and sat in the empty back row, at
once going to her knees and beginning to pray, a
current went through the nave, already half full,
echoed by latecomers, the current gathering strength
and swooping through the Settlement and into Drunk
Town.
  "Godalmighty, the Angel's gone to church,
our church ..."
  "Holy Trinity? Bollicks she's
Catholic ..."
  "Bollicks or not she be in't Holy
Titties, bright as a berry, all dress in red
and no knickers on ..."
  "Oh for God's sake, don't spread
rumors ..."
  "That's no rumor, she don't never wears
knickers ..."
  "In Holy Titties? Holy God! Is
she become one of us'n?"
  "Old Tweety'll wet hiself with glee
..."
  Maureen and Jamie had been behind her. They
hesitated beside the last pew, readying to say,
May we sit with you? but Angelique was still
kneeling as if in prayer and did not acknowledge
them though aware of their presence; and not a little
envious of the joyous green of Maureen's dress
and coat and matching hat, with its plume of yellow
chiffon hanging down her back. In a moment they
moved on, shoved ahead by the press of the others and
not wanting to disturb her--which was what she wanted.
After her initial passionate prayer of thanks
for the strength to conquer her vast disappointment, she
stayed on her knees, the hassock comfortable, and,
protected by her veil, watched wide-eyed to see
what would happen. This was the first Protestant
service she had witnessed.
  There was not as much reverence as in her own church but
it was packed, braziers spotted here and there against
the damp, and everyone mobile was in attendance. The
stained-glass windows were rich, the altar and
trappings throughout more stark than she was prepared for.
  Others would have stopped to greet or to nod,
filled with degrees of delight or bewilderment,
ready to sit beside her. But they did not, again not
wishing to interrupt. Gornt chose an opposite
pew.
  So she was left alone and soon the service
began. First hymn and she imitated the others,
standing when they stood, sitting when they sat, praying
when they prayed but always to the Blessed Mother, listened
to the sermon that the Reverend Tweet stuttered,
completely undone by her presence. More hymns and
chanting and the plate, an embarrassed moment as she
fumbled for a few coins, another hymn and the blessing
and then it was over to an audible,
well-earned relief.
  The congregation stood as the vicar went into the
vestry preceded by an ancient altar boy. Most
began to shuffle toward the exit, palates ready
for the traditional Sunday lunch, the best meal of the
week: roast beef, Yorkshire pudding, roast
potatoes for the lucky ones who could afford a
joint from the last shipment of ice-frozen
Australian beef.
  A few remained for a final prayer. Hers was
for forgiveness that she had come to this church but she was
confident that God would understand it was only a
momentary, necessary protest to Father Leo. All
eyes watched her as they filed out. Then she joined
the last of them, nodding and saying "'Morning,"
to murmured greetings.
  The vicar stood just outside the door, greeting
some, glowering at others. When she came up he
became both seraphic and stuttering, "Oh, my,
Miss Ang ... oh Madame, how wonderful
to see you, welcome to Holy Trinity, may we
see more of you ... if there's anything I can
explain ... Oh! No? Well I hope you
enjoyed, well please, please come again,
wonderful to see you, you're welcome ..."
  "Thank you, Reverend," she said, bobbed a quick
curtsey, hastily walked up the path and onto
the promenade.
  Sir William was waiting for her, Babcott
with him, muffled like everyone against the gusts. "Glad
to see you up and about," Sir William said
sincerely, "particularly here. We're rather proud
of Holy Trinity and you're very welcome, very, and
we're all happy you're here. The Vicar was a
bit off today, sorry about that, he's usually quite good
and not too much fire and brimstone. Did you enjoy
the service?"
  "It was so different, Sir William," she
said. "To worship in English and not Latin was
exotic."
  "Yes, I suppose it was. May we
walk with you?"
  "Please." They set off briskly,
exchanging pleasantries and genial questions,
avoiding the issue central to their mind with: the
weather's shocking, isn't it? the football match
yesterday afternoon was grand--may we escort you next
week; have you seen the latest papers, or heard the
Yokohama Players were putting on a performance
of Romeo and Juliet--Mrs.
Lunkchurch has kindly consented to play the starring
role against Mrs. Grimm's Romeo. "Have you
ever been on the boards, have you performed, Ma'am?"
  "Only children's Nativity plays in the
convent," she said. "And not very well ... oh!"
  A gust had seized Sir William's top
hat and sent it twirling, Babcott just managed
to hold on to his, she was not quick enough and hers went
sailing away with hats all along the promenade
to curses, wails, cheers and laughter. She
joined the melee and scurried after hers, but
Babcott retrieved it just before it went rolling
down onto the beach, Sir William's was
stopped by Phillip Tyrer who hurriedly handed
it to him then charged after his own.
  "My best beaver," Sir William said
sourly, brushing off mud that looked
suspiciously like manure. Her hat was
undamaged and, smiling, she put it back on
firmly, adjusted her hat pin. "Thank you,
George, I thought it was going for a swim."
  "So did I. Can we entertain you at lunch?"
  "Thank you but no, I'm staying indoors today."
  Soon they were at the Struan gateway. Both
men kissed her hand and she disappeared inside.
  "Lovely lady, good sort, good sport,"
Sir William said.
  "Yes." Babcott was frowning, looking out
to sea.
  Sir William followed his intent look.
Nothing amiss in the bay that he could see.
"What's up?"
  "Her period's begun."
  "Christ Almighty, you've examined her? Or
Hoag, why the devil didn't you tell me?"
  "We haven't examined her. I just know, that's
all."
  "Eh? How d'you th--" he stopped as
MacStruan and Dmitri went by, "'morning,
'morning to you," he said impatiently, then took
Babcott by the arm and started him down the street
to the Legation, "How d'you know? Eh?"
  "I'm a doctor for God's sake. I saw
her yesterday and today when I saw her without the veil
it leapt into my head. Her face was a little puffy
and when she ran after her hat I noticed she ran
awkwardly."
  "Damned if I did! God Almighty!
You're sure?"
  "No, but a hundred guineas says
so against a farthing."
  Sir William frowned. "Will Hoag know just
by looking at her too?"
  "I can't say."
  "In that case don't tell him."
  "Why on earth not?"
  "Let's leave it private between us, that's
best." Then Sir William said kindly,
"Let's leave Angelique to play her cards
as she wants. It is her game, hers and Tess
Struan's, not ours. It's ours no longer."

  Four Bakufu Enforcers, including a
sergeant, stomped through the Yoshiwara gateway.
They were like any other patrol of samurai
except the men were tougher, meaner and more alert. It
was early afternoon. In spite of the weather, the
traditional, leisurely procession of
courtesans, trailing maids, paraded up and
down, showing off their finery one to another and to the
groups of gai-jin gawking and drinking at the
caf`es and Teahouse, laughing as the wind sent a
few decorative umbrellas sailing.
  From time to time one of the Enforcers would stalk up to the
doorman of an Inn, or patron of a
Teahouse, or restaurant maid. At once the
person would bow and grovel and say, "No
Sire, the traitor Hiraga has not been
seen, oh no Sire, thank you Sire, yes at
once Sire, no I don't know him, Sire."
  Almost all of them knew where he was but kept their
peace, hating Enforcers, knowing, also, no reward was
big enough to prevent shishi vengeance, or Floating
World disgust, at a betrayal. In their world,
secrets were the spice and currency of life,
adding to the day's excitement.
  The patrol's progress seemed to be
haphazard. Then the Sergeant changed direction,
turned into the alley of the Three Carp and hammered
on the door in the fence.
  Hiraga was trapped. Whenever patrols were in
the vicinity, lookouts alerted him in good time
to flee to his underground hideaway in the tunnel
where he now had a rough bed, candles, matches,
food, his swords and pistol, and Katsumata's
explosives. Today when the alarm reached him,
Hiraga discovered other samurai searching that
garden so there was no chance to reach the well.
  In panic, he had rushed for the kitchen area and
had barely enough time to assume a
disguise, secreted there, that Katsumata had
given him as, a few metres away, masked by a
hedge, the Sergeant shoved past the bowing
doorman, kicked off his sandals and stomped onto
the veranda of the main house.
  Unaware Hiraga was above ground and so near,
Raiko came out to greet the Sergeant, knelt
and bowed, her face all charm, her insides
fluttering for this was the third day of searches--too
many for comfort. "Good afternoon, Sire, so sorry the
ladies are resting and not ready to receive clients."
  "I wish to search."
  "With pleasure, please follow."
  "Go to the kitchen."
  "Kitchen? Please, please to follow." She
led the way pleasantly. When she saw Hiraga
head down in the dirt amongst the dozen cooks and
workers, her knees almost failed her.
  Hiraga was filthy, his head covered by the
matted wig Katsumata had worn in
Hodogaya, and naked except for a soiled
loincloth and ragged singlet. "Tie a pebble under
your instep, Hiraga," Katsumata advised.
"Your walk as much as your face will give you
away, smear dirt on your face and armpits,
dung is better, pretend to be a scullion,
do not act, be one. Meanwhile make
incendiaries, instruct Takeda how to do it, and be
ready for when I return ..."
  The leather-faced sergeant stood with his hands on
his hips in the silence and looked around.
Painstakingly. Every corner, cupboard or
storeroom was scrutinized. Rows of rare
spices, teas, barrels of sak`e and bottles
of gai-jin liquor and bags of the finest rice.
He grunted to hide his envy.
  "You! Head cook!" The portly, terrified
man raised his head. "Stand over there! Line up,
all of you." In their haste to obey they stumbled
over one another, Hiraga limping badly,
dirty, naked but for the grimy loincloth and ragged
singlet, shoved his way into line. Muttering
curses, the samurai stared at each man as he
went down the line. When he came up to Hiraga
his nostrils wrinkled with disgust at the stench, then
he moved to the next man to the next man and the
next, vented his pent-up rage by shouting at the
last man who collapsed in a petrified heap.
Then the Sergeant stalked back and stood in
front of Hiraga, feet planted.
"You!" he bellowed. "You!"
  Raiko cried out and nearly swooned, everyone
stopped breathing, Hiraga fell on his face,
grovelling and moaning, bracing his feet against the
wall to hurl himself forward at the Sergeant's
legs. But the man began raving, "You are a
disgrace to a kitchen, and you," he whirled on
Raiko who backed against the wall, terrified,
Hiraga just managing to stop his lunge in time,
"You should be ashamed to have a dung-covered scum like
this in a kitchen for the rich." His iron-hard toe
kicked the befouled in the neck and shoulder joint and
Hiraga cried out in real pain, the wig almost
came off and he grabbed it in panic, hands over
his head. "Get rid of him. If this lice bag
is here or in the Yoshiwara by sundown, I will
close you for filth! Shave his head!" Another
kick and he stalked out.
  No one moved until the all-clear came.
Even then they started to pick themselves up warily,
maids rushed in with smelling salts for Raiko
who tottered away leaning on them, while kitchen
workers helped Hiraga to his feet. He was in
pain but did not show it. At once he stripped and
went out to the servants' area and washed himself,
scrubbing and scrubbing, filled with revulsion--he
had had only enough time to dig his hands into the nearest
bucket of night soil and smear himself and rush to a
place near the fires.
  When he was partially satisfied he stalked
naked for his house, to bathe again, this time in hot
water, certain he would never feel clean again.
Raiko intercepted him on the veranda, not fully
recovered from her alarm.
  "So sorry, Hiraga-sama, the lookout
failed to warn us but the samurai in that garden ...
Hot water and a bath maid is waiting for you
inside but now, so sorry, perhaps you should go, it's
too dangerou--"
  "I am waiting for Katsumata, then I shall
leave. He has paid you well."
  "Yes but the Enforc--"
  "Baka! You are responsible for the warning
system. If there is another mistake, your head
goes in the bucket!"
  Grim-visaged he stalked into the bathhouse where
the maid knelt and bowed so fast she banged her
head. "Baka!" he snarled, not yet over his
utter fright, the foul taste of fear still with him. He
squatted on the tiny stool, ready for the
maid to begin scrubbing. "Hurry up!"
  Baka, he thought enraged. Everyone is
baka, Raiko is baka, but not Katsumata
--he is not baka, he was right again: without the shit
I would be dead, or worse, captured alive.

                YEDO

  Dusk was a busy time for the inhabitants of
Yedo's Yoshiwara, the biggest and finest in all
Nippon, a maze of tiny streets and pleasant
places on the edge of the city, covering almost two
hundred acres, where Katsumata and other
shishi, or ronin, could hide in safety--if
acceptable.
  Katsumata was particularly acceptable.
Money was not a problem for him. He paid the
waitress for his soup and noodles and strolled
unhurried towards the House of Wisteria, still
disguised as a bonze though now he wore a
false mustache and was clad differently, his
shoulders made wider with pads, his robe richer.
  Colorful lanterns were being lit everywhere,
gardens and paths given their last brushing, fresh
flower arrangements finished. Inside the
Teahouses and Inns of greater or lesser
importance, geisha and courtesans and
mama-sans were being bathed and dressed, chattering and
preparing for tonight's entertainment. Kitchens abuzz,
men chopping and dicing and preparing sauces and
sweetmeats and decorations and cauldrons of the
choicest rice, cleaning fish and caressing
marinades into them.
  Lots of friendly laughter. Misery here and there,
some in tears thinking of clients allocated or
strangers who must be received and welcomed with
smiles and laughter, and satisfied--and not the young
lovers many hearts yearned for, the yearning to be
left alone and allowed to sleep. As always,
mama-sans and older, more experienced courtesans
gentled them, repeating the same dogma that Meikin
was saying to Teko, Koiko's maiko, now in
tears, who was to make her debut as a courtesan
this night, "Dry your tears, Moonbeam, accept
without thinking the sad impermanence of life, accept
what lies ahead, laugh with your sisters, enjoy
wine and song and your pretty clothes, gaze at the
moon or at a flower and drift with the current of
life like a gourd drifting downstream. Run
along now."
  I will not accept that Katsumata betrayed my
Koiko with just cause, Meikin thought, her heart
aching. He had no need or justification
to compromise my precious with that woman shishi,
however brave! Worse, he was baka to end such
a marvelous source of influence and private
information from Yoshi's shadow, stupid stupid
stupid! But it is done. Finished. Take your
own advice, Meikin: Drift, what does it
matter, truly?
  I accept that it matters. Koiko mattered
to all of us, not the least to Yoshi, now pitilessly
against all shishi.
  Again the mama-san sat at her mirror. The
reflection stared back at her. Her makeup,
heavier than usual, no longer hid the shadows and
sagging care lines.
  I accept, too, that I have aged horribly
since the shoya interrupted us, Raiko and me--
Eleventh Day of Twelfth Month, Last
Month, the last day of my life. Just
thirty-three days ago. Only thirty-three
days and I look like a crone, long past the
normal span of fifty years. Thirty-three
days of tears, a lake of tears when I thought I
was safely beyond tears, sure that I had used up
all my tears long ago, over lovers I can
hardly remember, over one I can still feel and
smell and taste and yearn for, my penniless young
samurai who left without warning, without a word or
letter, for another Teahouse and another woman,
taking the little money I had saved and the broken
pieces of my spirit that he cast into the gutter. And
later then more tears over my baby son, dead in
the house fire of his foster parents, his rich old
merchant father wandering off like the other, my suicide
unsuccessful.
  Too many Floating years. Thirty-three
years drifting, one for each of the harrowing days.
Now I have forty-three years, forty-three years
today I was born. What should I do now? Soon the
Lord Yoshi will demand payment. Karma.
  I accept that I trained Koiko, offered her,
guaranteed her. What more can I offer in
supplication? What can I do?
  Her reflection did not answer.
  A knock. "Mistress, Katsumata-sama
is here, he is early."
  Her stomach felt hollow. "I will be there
instantly."
  To calm herself Meikin drank some of the gai-jin
brandy that Raiko had given her. When she was
easier, she went out and along the exquisite
corridor towards a guest reception room,
all woods and tatami and shoji the most
expensive. In wonderful taste. Bought and paid
forwith so much effort and heartache and cajoling but, because
of Koiko the Flower, her House was immensely
profitable and a pleasure for her bankers. Today she
had a meeting. "We notice, so sorry, your
receipts are considerably down compared to last
month."
  "It is the season, a poor time of the year for
all Teahouses, and unseasonably cold.
Business will pick up with the spring. We are in
huge profit for the year, there's no need
to worry." But she knew, and knew the
Gyokoyama knew that most of her profit was because
of Koiko, that now a gossamer curtain hung
between her and ruin. If Yoshi decided.
  Then why increase your risk allowing shishi here,
she asked herself. Particularly Katsumata--
he's the first of Yoshi's enemies now. What
does it matter? There must be bad with the good, the
bad can be dealt withandthe good enjoyed. Exciting to be
part of the shishi, their bravery and sonno-joi, their
fight for freedom from the yoke of centuries,
laying down their lives for the Emperor in their
tragic and hopeless quest, all of them so young and
valiant, born to fail, so sad. And if they were
to win, would those who next rule, will they free us from
our yoke of ages?
  No. Never. Not us, not women. We will be where
we are now, in thrall to the yang.
  Her eyes caught a glimpse of the moon
breaking out of a sunset-reddened cloud, for an
instant peerless, to be swallowed again, the red
becoming more brown and then gold and into darkening
flames--one moment alive, the next dead.
  "Beautiful, neh?"
  "Yes, Katsumata-sama, so sad and so
beautiful, yes. Ah, they have brought tea, so
sorry you are leaving us."
  "I shall be back in a few days. Have you anything
more from Raiko? Anything further about the gai-jin,
their plans?"
  Meikin poured tea for him, pausing a moment
to admire the superb design of cups. "It
seems the Lord Yoshi has had a meeting with the
gai-jin leader to make friends with them."
She related Furansu-san's information that
Raiko's envoy had whispered to her a few
nights before, but had kept from him until now.
"Also the gai-jin Kanagawa doctor
secretly examined the tair@o here the same
day, giving him gai-jin medicines--I hear he
is improved."
  "Baka," he said disgustedly.
  "Yes. This doctor should be stopped.
Raiko's source says he returns tomorrow or the
next day to see the tair@o again."
  "So ka?" His interest doubled. "Where? In
the castle?"
  She shook her head. "No. This is the best
part, outside the walls, in the palace of
Zukumura the Idiot, as last time."
  His face twisted. "So many choices,
Meikin, rare choices. Just like Utani, neh?
So much temptation. Utani's killing still resounds
around all Nippon! Hiraga? Is he caught
yet?"
  "No, the chief gai-jin let Akimoto go and
Takeda is still also safe." She watched him and
wondered what he was thinking, then added softly,
"Two last facts you should know. Lord Yoshi was
at the meeting of doctor and tair@o, also with
only a few guards. I hear he will be there
again." She saw his eyes glitter in the light that
permeated the room and felt a sudden fear, sensing
his restrained violence.
  "Yoshi and Anjo together, those dogs outside the
walls together? Eeee, Meikin, how rare!"
Katsumata trembled with excitement. "Can you
find out exactly when the doctor arrives?"
  She leaned forward, almost sick with hope, and
whispered, "Another courier is due this evening.
I will know then, Raiko would understand what a vital
chance it could be for us, for all of us, for all of us
to settle many scores."
  In truth it was a never-before opportunity, if
it came to pass. He scowled. "I cannot wait
here, or come back tonight. When was the other meeting,
what part of the day?"
  "Early."
  The scowl deepened, then dissolved. "Meikin,
all shishi will thank you. If the meeting's tomorrow,
send me the time at once, the Inn of Blue
Skies, near the bridge at Nihonbashi."
  He bowed and she bowed, both satisfied, for
now.

        END OF VOLUME XI
























 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
               GAI-JIN
          A Novel of Japan

                  by
          JAMES CLAVELL



   Volume XII of Twelve Volumes
      Pages i-ii and 2491-2723




For special distribution as authorized by Act of
Congress under Public Law 89-522, andwiththe
permission of the copyright holder.




Produced in braille for the Library of Congress,
National Library Service for the Blind and
Physically Handicapped, by Braille International,
Inc., 1994.











Copyright 1993 by James Clavell

All rights reserved.











               GAI-JIN

            BOOK FIVE

                 

    Sunday, 11th January: (continued)
  The bridge at Nihonbashi was considered the
first stage of the Tokaid@o, on the fringe of
Yedo, and the Inn of Blue Skies one of
dozens, rich and poor, that were scattered in the
district. Tonight was black and cold, the sky
solid cloud, midnight still hours away. The
Blue Skies lay in a dirty little alley,
one of the poorer establishments, a nondescript,
ramshackle, two-story building with outhouses,
kitchens and a few separate one-room bungalows
in the garden behind walls. On the veranda of one of
these, Katsumata sat meditating, his robe
padded against the chill, enjoying the garden that alone
had had care lavished on it.
  Colorful lanterns amidst choice plantings
around a tiny stream, a bridge, the soothing,
friendly sound of trickling water and cloppp
cloppp of the pivoted, resonant bamboo cup
falling against its stone, filling with water and
emptying from the miniature waterfall as long as the
water fell. His silent shishi bodyguard
stopped momentarily, motioned that all was well, and
continued on his roving patrol around the Inn.
  Katsumata was content, his plans perfected:
two shishi were to join him in the morning for
Yokohama, this guard and one other. The
sacrifice of these two with Hiraga, Takeda and
Akimoto would ensure the burning of the Settlement
and sinking the warship, and therefore the bombardment and
obliteration of Yedo with all its consequent
results. At the last minute he would take
over the firing of the church as he had always
anticipated, allowing Hiraga to lead the
assault team against the warship, thus giving himself
plenty of opportunity to escape whereas the others
would have none.
  His fingers fondled the hilt of a long sword in
his lap, enjoying the touch of the fine leather, already
imagining himself part of these acts of terrorism that
would lift sonno-joi from the present apathy that
surrounded it, making certain his leadership of the
newly formed shishi cadres, from now on to be
dominated by himself and Satsuma.
  Next, Yoshi and Anjo, however
tempting, were not as important as Yokohama, so
he had left them to other shishi here. There were not enough
men to mount a frontal attack, so he had
devised an ambush. An ambush might succeed,
probably would not, but its very audacity again would be
uplifting. For this he needed to know the exact time
of the doctor's return. If Meikin reported
it was tomorrow, he would alert men already primed and
waiting in a nearby Inn for this suicide mission,
still leaving him his two for Yokohama.
  It will be enough if the ambush is launched so
close to the castle, he told himself, light-headed
with anticipation. This, together with Yokohama, will
assure sonno-joi and make my future
sublime. If only there was more time to prepare!
Ah time! "Time is a thought," he had told his
students in their Zen classes, opening and closing
his fist for emphasis, "Time exists but does not
exist, is permanent and impermanent, fixed and
elastic, necessary and unnecessary, to be held in the hand and
wondered at: why?"'
  Solemnly he opened his palm and stared at it.
Then chuckled. What nonsense! But oh how those
youths used to rack their brains for meaning when there was
none, Ori especially, and Hiraga, my best
students, future leaders I had hoped. But
Ori is dead and now Hiraga is tainted and
treacherous.
  The cloppp cloppp of the water mobile was
comforting. And the trickling water. His being was filled
with vitality and plans and ideas, the future
once again balmy, no tiredness tonight, plenty of
time for Meikin to send ...
  A shadow moved in the shrubs, another, slight
sound at the back and he was on his feet, sword
in hand, racing for the secret door that was hidden in the
bushes but three ninja-clad men came out of the
shadows and blocked him from it, swords raised.
At once he twisted and charged another way, but
more ninja were there, the whole garden filling, some
moving at him, others rock still, waiting for him
to come to them. At once he launched a berserk
attack against an easy target, the four men
closing on him from the left, killing one, the others
evaporating as quickly as they appeared. A sudden
blinding pain in his eyes from acid powder they had
flung in his face. In agony he howled with
rage, lunging sightlessly at the enemy, his
frenzy at being ambushed and tricked, lending him
maniacal strength to his arms and wings
to his feet.
  His sword found flesh, the man cried out,
armless, and Katsumata coiled and blindly lashed out
again, darted left and right and right again, feinting,
trying to wipe his eyes clean. Twisting, hacking,
darting this way and that in panic, clawing at his
eyes.
  His sight cleared momentarily. An open path
to safety and the fence lay in front of him.
Berserk, he leapt forward, then an enormous
blow on the back of his head sent him reeling. In
desperation he reversed his sword to fall on it but
another blow smashed it away, breaking his arm.
He shrieked. His consciousness vanished.
  The swirling black pit was an eternity of
torment with red and green flashes behind his eyes, no
sight there, no hearing but for a gigantic hammering,
chest afire, heart pulsating, all openings out of
control. Icy water drenched him and he gasped.
Another deluge in his face and another. Coughing
and heaving he came out of the dark. Agony from his
broken arm, the bone splinted and protruding,
soared into his head and blew his sight back. He
found himself spread-eagled on the ground, helpless,
a ninja standing on each wrist and each ankle but
they were not ninja. Now their masks were off. He
recognized Abeh who stood over him. Then he
saw Yoshi nearby, dark clad, but not as the
fighters. Twenty or thirty others all around.
Silent as the night and the area.
  "So, Katsumata! Katsumata the Raven,
Katsumata the shishi and leader of shishi and
patron of women," Yoshi said, his voice so
kind. "What a shame you are alive. Please,
the truth. Koiko, she was part of your plot,
neh?"
  Katsumata was frantically trying to collect
his wits and when he did not answer immediately, the
samurai standing on his fractured arm twisted the
protruding bone viciously and he screamed, the
iron will he always presumed he possessed lost
with his freedom. "Please oh please ..."
  "Koiko, she was part of your plot?"
  "Not my plot, Sire, hers and the mama-san,
hers, Sire," the broken man babbled, his head
on fire like his arm, the pain intolerable, "not ...
she was ... it was her, her and the mama-san not me,
Lord, nothing to do with me it was her and Meikin her
mama-san, not me, it was them, not me ..."
  "So ka? And Sumomo, the
shishi who escaped with you through the tunnel, the
Ky@oto tunnel, remember? You remember
Sumomo? You blackmailed Koiko and without her
knowledge secretly ordered Sumomo to murder me,
neh?"
  "Sum ... momo, Sire? I don't know,
who is, is she ... nothing to do with me, noth--"
The words trailed into another scream as the man
standing on his arm shifted his stance.
  Yoshi sighed, his face a mask. He motioned
to Meikin who was standing to one side, out of
Katsumata's eye line, Inejin beside her. "You
heard your accuser, Meikin?"
  "Yes Sire." She came forward weakly,
her voice small and shuddering. "So sorry, he
is a liar. We were never part of any plot against
you, never, he is a liar. We are blameless."
She looked down at Katsumata, loathing him,
glad she had betrayed him and that she was revenged--
his cowardice and caught alive better than
anything she had dared hope for.
  "Liar!" she hissed and backed off as he
began raving, trying impotently to get at her
until another of the men smashed him senseless and he
lay back moaning fitfully, not one of them with
any sympathy.
  Her head was pounding like never before, her mouth tasted
vile. "But, Sire, so sorry, it is also
true I knew him, so did my treasure but
only as an ancient client, only that. He was
an ancient client and I did not know then who he
was or what this ..." She hesitated trying to find
a word that fit her loathing. "... this thing really
did."
  "I believe you, Meikin. Good, at last the
truth. Good. And because he is the liar you may have
him, as I agreed."
  "Thank you, Lord."
  "Obey her," he said to Abeh, "then bring her
outside."
  He strode off. All the men went with him,
surrounding him, shielding him, except for Abeh
and the men restraining the spread-eagled man, now
moaning into consciousness again. She waited, savoring
the moment, for herself, for Koiko and all the
Floating World, so rare to have revenge, so very rare.
  "Please strip him," she said, quite calm. They
obeyed her. She knelt and showed Katsumata the
knife. It was small but sufficient for her
purposes. "Traitor, you won't
fornicate in hell, if there is a hell."
  When at length the shrieks subsided
into unconsciousness, she dealt with him as with a pig.
"That's what you are," she murmured, and wiped the
knife clean and slipped it into her obi, blood
still on her hands and sleeves.
  "I will take that please," Abeh said,
nauseated by her vengeance. Silently she gave
him the knife and followed to the courtyard, men
surrounding her. Yoshi was waiting. She knelt in
the dirt. "Thank you, Lord. I believe he
regretted he betrayed you, betrayed us before
leaving. Thank you."
  "And you, Meikin?"
  "I never betrayed you, I told the truth, I
have told you all I know and gave you the traitor
tonight."
  "So?"
  Unafraid, she looked at him directly,
not many eyes so unrelenting as his, and dismissed
that, preferring to see him as a man, one of a thousand
clients or officials she had had to brave in
her lifetime, for money or favors, for herself or
her House. "It is time to go onwards, Sire."
She put her hand into her sleeve and brought out the
small phial. "I can do it here if you wish, my
death poem is written, the Gyokoyama
possess the House of Wisteria. But I am of the
Floating World," she said proudly. "It is not
seemly to depart befouled, with unclean blood
speckling me and on my hands. I would like to go
onwards clean. I would like to go back to my
House. A death wish, Sire: a bath and clean
clothes. Please?"

                 

              YOKOHAMA

    Tuesday, 13th January:
  Angelique was among the riders exercising their
ponies in the early morning light at the
Yokohama racetrack, cantering alone,
by choice, hardly noticing the others. The
circuit was busy and all the riders watched her.
A lot of money was riding with her that morning. She
was overdue. At least a day.
  "Edward, she is, isn't she?" Pallidar
asked, riding alongside Gornt on the other
side of the field. "Er, overdue?"
  "Yes, suh, the figures add up that way."
Gornt looked across at her and pondered what he
was going to do. She was mounted on a black pony that
Malcolm had given her, and wore a black
riding habit, very snug, black boots and hat
with a half veil. "Her tailor's good, never
seen that outfit before."
  "Yes and she's got a good seat too,"
Pallidar said dryly.
  Both laughed. "But she does ride like a
dream, no doubt about it, pretty as any
Southern belle."
  "Seriously, what do you think? I mean, there
are all sorts of rumors about dates, not many of
us have ever had, I mean, not many of us know about the
Curse, the intervals, and all that. Have you money
on it?"
  So much you'd never believe, Gornt thought.
"Yesterday I asked Hoag point-blank."
  "Good God, just like that? I'd never have had the
balls, old boy." Pallidar leaned closer,
his mount a dragoon gelding grey, and a hand bigger
than Gornt's pony. "What did he say?"
  "He says he doesn't know any more than we
do. You know what he's like so I believe him."
Gornt hid his impatience, missing her company.
They had agreed to keep up the pretense of
avoiding each other until she was sure if she
wasn't, nothing could begin until then--or until
the second month. "The 11th or 12th are right
though he did say she could be late but not much
later to ... start. If she doesn't, she's
bearing."
  "Christ! Makes you think, what? Tough for her
if she is, poor lady, more than tough when you
think of Hong Kong Tess and the problems. And
tougher if she isn't, if you believe the rumors
--don't know which is tougher." Bugles began
sounding on the bluff above the racecourse where the
soldier's tented encampment lay--a thousand
soldiers there. "Bloody hell," Pallidar
muttered.
  "What?"
  "It's a "Return to base." The
General's probably just got a hangover and
wants to snarl at everyone."
  "You going with Sir William tomorrow?"
  "The Kanagawa-Yoshi conference? Suppose
so. Generally I'm the dogsbody. I'd better
go. Dinner in the Mess?"
  "Thanks, I'd like that." Gornt watched
Pallidar pirouette his horse impeccably
to gallop off and mingle with other army officers
streaming away. He noticed Hoag coming up from the
Settlement to join the circuit. The Doctor
rode well, easy in the saddle for such a heavy
man. Deciding to intercept him he heeled his
pony--a brown stallion, the best in the Brock
stable--into a canter, then changed his mind. He had
ridden enough for today. They would hear soon enough,
Hoag would never be able to keep that news to himself
once it was fact.
  Before leaving the track he waved to Angelique
and called out, "'morning, Ma'am, you're a joy
to see on a chill day."
  She looked up, pulled from her own private
world. "Oh. Thank you, Mr. Gornt."
  He saw her melancholy, but she smiled at
him. Reassured he trotted on, content, no
need to rush her. First is she or isn't she?
Either way is fine with me.
  Angelique had been pleased to see him,
enjoying his open admiration and elegance and
masculinity. The strain of the waiting, remaining
alone, holding to her regime of mourning, bottling
up secrets, was beginning to tell--her early
morning ride, occasional promenades, reading as
many new books as she could find, talking
to Vargas about silk and silkworms, trying to work
up an enthusiasm, were the only luxuries she
allowed herself. Then she saw Hoag.
  Hoag! If she continued her canter she would
catch up with him. A trot would avoid him, and
even easier to turn and go home. "Good morning,
Monsieur le docteur, how are you?"
  "Oh hello, you're looking well."
  "I'm not," she said, "I'm piqued. But
thank you anyway." A slight hesitation and she
added casually, "a woman never feels well
during that time of the month."
  Startled he jerked his reins and his mare
bridled, neighed and shook her head, frightening
Angelique's mount. In moments both were in
tight control again. "Sorry," he said gruffly,
"I'd ... I'd expected the opposite." The
suddenness and her nonchalance was so unsettling that he
almost said, Are you sure? Must be getting old,
he thought, irritated with himself for not seeing the
obvious--obvious now that he looked at her.
"Well, at least you know."
  "I'm terribly disappointed, for Malcolm's
sake, but somehow it doesn't seem to, to skewer
me anymore. Of course I cried my heart out
but now ..." Her guilelessness made him want
to reach out and comfort her.
  "With all the rest, that's understandable,
Angelique. Better that way. I told you
before, so long as you can cry, none of it will damage
you. May I ask when you started?"
  There were more bugles from the bluff. "What's
going on? I saw Settry and other officers
rush off."
  "The bugles are just recalling officers,
routine, nothing to worry about." Hoag looked
around to make sure no one was near. "Thanks for
telling me," he laughed nervously, "if a little
abruptly. Can we talk as we ride?"
  "Certainly," she said, knowing full well why
she had told him. It was seeing Gornt today and
Hoag convenient. And because she wanted the fight
to begin. "It began Sunday."
  "I don't know whether to say, you're lucky
or unlucky."
  "It's neither," she said. "It was the will of God,
I accept that. I'm sorry for Malcolm, not for
me. For me, it's the will of God. What do you do
now, inform her?"
  "Yes, but first I have to give you a letter."
  It was her turn to be startled. "You had a letter
all this time but didn't give it to me?"
  "She asked me to give it to you if you were not
bearing Malcolm's child."
  "Oh." She thought about that, feeling slightly
sick. "And if I was what then?"
  "That's a hypothetical question now, isn't it?"
he said gently, her sudden pallor worrisome.
This young lady's not out of the woods yet, not by a
long shot.
  "I want to know."
  "I was asked to give you this letter if your period
began, Angelique. Would you like to go back now?
I'll bring it to your suite."
  "Thank you but I'll ... I'll wait while
you collect it, I'll wait outside
Struan's." She spurred ahead, finished this
circuit, oblivious of the others--every one of them
watching her. On a whim she wheeled to take the
path for a short gallop to clear her head of fear.
Spurs and knees and hands and the pony was smoothly
flat out.
  Ahead were two church spires and the perimeter
fence, the Yoshiwara nestling outside but inside
its own walls, the bridge and guard house. For a
moment her mind took her back in time and it was as
if she was galloping towards them panic-stricken,
the bloody Tokaid@o behind her, hat gone,
clothes torn, frightened nearly to death. The vision
evaporated as she reined in--how long ago that
all seemed. A different kind of fear remained.
She had cast the die.

  Tess's letter read:

I'm sure you will agree there is no need for
pleasantries that are meaningless between us.
  I'm glad that you are not bearing my son's
child. That makes the future simpler and less
messy. I do not accept or acknowledge the
"marriage" or that you have any legal claims
whatsoever against him--to the contrary.
  By the time you read this the Noble House will have
begun a new era, or be teetering on
bankruptcy. If the first, it will be due in part
to your sending me that person.
  Because of that, as a finder's fee, I will pay
capital into the Bank of England, in trust, necessary
to provide you with an income of two thousand guineas
a year--if, in turn, you provide me within
thirty days from today's date (when your period has
been established), with an affidavit on the
following conditions:
  First, that you repudiate and relinquish forever
any and all claims you or any
representatives might dream up against my
son's nonexistent estate--you realize that as a
minor and never accredited legally as tai-pan, he
had no estate to leave.
  Second, that you agree to relinquish all
claims to, and agree no longer to use the
"Mrs. Malcolm Struan" title or any
version of it. (for face, yrs, I suggest you have
regretfully decided to do this because, being
Catholic, you accept you were not legally married according
to your faith and your Church, not that I accept
the ceremony was valid in any way.)
  Third, that you will not set foot in Hong
Kong again, other than to transship, nor seek
to meet me, write to me or have any contact with
me or my line in the future.
  Fourth, that your affidavit formally
notarized by Sir William Aylesbury,
H.m.'s Minister for Japan, be delivered
to me here in Hong Kong, via Dr. Hoag as
surety, by February 14th, a little over thirty
days approximately from today (the date your
period has been established).
  Last, that if you marry within the year the
capital will be enlarged to increase the yearly
stipend to three thousand guineas for the first ten years.
On your death the capital reverts to me or my
heirs.
  Within three weeks of reading this, please
remove yourself from Struan premises. I have
advised Mr. Albert MacStruan, by letter today,
to that effect, and also that, from today, your credit with
Struan's is ended and that any chits given, or
purportedly given, by my son and authenticated
by his chop only are not to be honored--excepting
those that are personally signed and dated by him, thus
completely bona fide.
  If, within three weeks, your affidavit
is signed and ready for Dr. Hoag, then Mr.
MacStruan is authorized to give you at once
credit to FIVE HUNDRED guineas on account of
your guaranteed trust which will be erected within thirty
days, the yearly amount to be paid quarterly.
  Should you decline the above conditions (you have my
solemn word they are not negotiable) or I do not
see Dr. Hoag by said specified date,
February 12th, the next day, Friday 13th,
my solicitors will file court proceedings against
you to the maximum I and they feel justified, the
first of which is that with malice aforethought you caused the
death of my son.
  A piece of advice: Mr. Skye may
twist and turn and scream duress, that these are
threats against your person. They are not. My
solicitors advise me they are not, that this is a
generous, legal way to remove a tiresome
problem my son, for whatever ill-advised
reasons, has caused.
  Please ask Dr. Hoag to return as
soon as possible with your affidavit, or
nonagreement. Tess Struan, December
28th December, Year of our Lord, 1862,
at Hong Kong.

  Gornt looked up from the letter. "You don't
accept."
  "That's exactly what Mr. Skye
told me." Some of Angelique's fury
dissipated on the spot. She sat in her tall
chair, stiff and set-faced, Gornt opposite
her, and they were in her boudoir. "I'm glad you
agree. I'll reply in kind to that, that woman this
afternoon!"
  "No, that would be wrong. I'm saying you don't
fight, that's the worst you can do. You compromise."
  She became ashen again, more than angry. "You
say accept these ... this foulness?"
  "I'm just saying you can compromise in due
course," he said, his mind working well and
logically though his chest and throat felt tight.
"I'm sure I can get you better terms."
  "Terms? Then you do say accept this in
principle? Accept this? I thought you were a
fighter and my friend but you'll let her get away with
dragging my face in the mud?"
  "I know she said it's non-negotiable, I
don't believe that, I can improve it. Her first
offer, two or three thousand already makes you
comfortable, five and you'd be rich."
  "That doesn't outweigh her vile manners,
her evil threats, constant hostility and enmity!
I was married legally. Legally!" Angelique
stamped her foot. "Not to be Mrs. Struan?
Not to set foot in Hong Kong, to be addressed
in this way, how dare she? As though I am ...
I am a felon!"
  "I agree. On your behalf I'll
renegotiate."
  "J@esus. I want her humbled, smashed."
  "So do I, but now is not the time."
  "What?"
  "The great Dirk Struan really did
ill-use my mother's family, the Tillmans, not
as bad as Morgan, but bad enough." His smile
was cruel. "If I can crush Brocks, why not
Struans? It's all the same to me. Revenge
is a meal we can eat together leisurely,
morsel by morsel."
  "We can?" A sudden warmth went into her loins,
he looked so confident and handsome and strong.
"How?"
  "First, what did Skye say?"
  "He said at once to fight and showed me papers
he has prepared for filing in Hong Kong,
London and Paris an--"
  "Paris? Why Paris?"
  She explained about "Ward of the
State." "He says in Paris with Ward of
France as a fact we will win, the marriage will be
declared legal according to French law, and then I can
settle at my whim, not hers."
  "Has he mentioned fees, Angelique?"
  She flushed. "That has nothing to do with his
advice."
  "Nonsense," he said harshly. "Our only
safety is to face the truth and understand the games
being played. That little bastard, 'scuse me, but I
use the term advisedly, he is by the way, I
found that out in Hong Kong, that little bastard is
only thinking of his future, not yours, imagining
himself in various courts defending this poor but
beautiful French widow, swaying various juries
--and losing everything for you."
  "I don't see ... Why?"
  "Malcolm has no estate."
  "But ... but Mr. Skye says according to French
law th--"
  "Wake up, Angelique!" His voice was
even harsher. It was vital to get her out of this
stupid, useless rage.
  The moment he had come into her boudoir and had
seen her tight-lipped, seething, a letter shaking in
her hand, he had realized that this was the letter Hoag
had told him about, that therefore there was no child and now
Plan A could be hurtled into place. His joy
had crested.
  Pretending to know nothing, he had begun cheery
greetings but these were spurned, the letter shoved at
him, her fury making her even more attractive--
the passion good for both of them, he had thought
contentedly. But now it must be channeled and refined,
like his. "Skye's full of wind! Wake up!"
  "I am awake, he is not, and don't think
for a mom--"
  "Stop it! Use your head for God's sake!
It's you who's at risk, not him!" For an
instant he wondered again what Tess's second
letter, the other letter contained that, now, no one would ever
know--Hoag had said part of the agreement with Tess
was that, prior to delivering this one, he would burn the
other unopened. Would Hoag really do that, or would
he have read it before burning it though he had sworn
a holy oath to abide exactly with her wishes?
Wish I knew, but then that's only icing on the
cake.
  "Angelique, dear Angelique ..." He
tossed the letter on the table as though it were
dirty, believing it to be wonderful, got up and
sat beside her and took her hand. "Paris and French
law and all the rest are only for Skye's
benefit, not yours. Even if he won, I'd
wager ten thousand to one against, their ruling will have no
bearing on Tess Struan and Hong Kong ...
Listen to me," he said louder as she started
to override him. "We've not much time and you have to be
sensible. While you borrow or pauper yourself or
sell yourself to pay his costs, let alone the fees
he needs, you'll lose this one chance. He
hasn't got but a few dollars. How's he
going to get to Hong Kong, let alone Paris or
London? That's a pipe dream." Sullenly
she pulled her hand away. He laughed. "You're
like a spoiled brat and I love you for it."
  "You ..." She stopped. "You do?"
  "Love you or think you're a spoiled brat?"
  With a different voice she said, "Both."
  "Both," he said in a different voice and
took her hand again and grinned when she tried to pull
it away. This time he did not allow it. With
equal, gentle firmness he pulled her closer
and kissed her deeply. Her fight was immediate,
soon to lessen, soon to enjoy. Both of them.
When he released her he ducked at once,
correctly anticipating her nails which slashed
at him. "Whoa, there," he said as though to a spirited
horse, delighted he had the measure of her.
"Whoa there, Nelly!"
  She laughed in spite of her anger. "You're
a devil."
  "Yes, but I'll make a fine husband.
Ma'am."
  Her smile faded. The anger vanished. She
got up and went to the window and stared out at the bay
and the ships there. Lots of activity around the
warships. He watched and waited, hoping that he
had judged correctly. When she was ready, she
said, "You say compromise, Edward. How?"
  "I'd take the next, fastest boat to Hong
Kong," he said. "I'll see her at once and
make changes you and I agree on--and I think
are possible. I'm sure I can up the stipend.
Five instead of two or three thousand would be
acceptable, yes?"
  "She says those disgusting terms won't be
changed."
  "I will change them, some of them."
  "Which?"
  "We can discuss those today and tomorrow. I'm confident
about the money."
  "Mon Dieu, the money's not everything, and
why so quickly? There's till the 14th of next
month."
  "I must be first with the news, to catch her off
balance. That makes my bargaining position
better. For you," he added.
  She turned and looked at him. "Also for you
too."
  "Also for me," he said, these twists and turns
and risks and gambles, a wrong word fatal, more
thrilling than the best poker game he had ever
been in, the stakes the highest. Her. Her and his
future indivisible. And she holds most of the
aces, he told himself, though she doesn't know
it: her immediate agreement to Tess's demands, at his
persuasion, would make Tess more keen than ever
to be his ally, so vital to his future; her
five thousand guineas would help to cement
Rothwell-Gornt; and her venom would ensure
Tess's end.
  "I love you and want to marry you," he said.
"Please."
  "It's much too soon to answer that."
  "I don't agree, you're footloose and
fancy free."
  "Because I'm not married and never was?" she
snapped.
  "Calm down, honey, think calmly! We're
adults, I have a right to ask, to say I love you
and to want to marry you."
  She dropped her gaze and conceded, needing him,
he alone could shield her from Tess. "Sorry,
yes, sorry, the ... the letter unsettled me.
But, it's too soon to answer you, really."
  "I don't agree. I believe you love
me, the promise could be private, not to be
advertised, between us. I love you, we would make
a grand team," he said, meaning it, "the future's
vast for us once this ..." he motioned at the letter,
"once this no longer threatens you. We've much in
common and a common goal, to destroy your enemy and
mine, at leisure."
  "I don't love you, I like you, immensely,
perhaps I could, perhaps I would love you in time and I
would try if ... if I was to marry you, no,
don't move, let me finish." Her fingers were
toying with a pearl buckle that she had bought in the
village and that reminded her as
MacStruan would not honor her remaining chits it
was, apart from her engagement ring and the jade ring, the
only jewelry she still possessed. And Andr`e
would be around this afternoon again. She put that worry
away for later and concentrated. Curious that
Edward should have the same idea that I have. We think
alike in many ways. "For the moment let me
answer that later. When's the next ship for Hong
Kong?"
  "The best and fastest would be tomorrow night.
Cooper-Tillman's Atlanta Belle,
direct Hong Kong then San Francisco,"
he said at once, arrivals and departures in the
forefront of every trader's mind. "She'll be in
Hong Kong before our clipper, Night Witch
--she's not due here for three days."
  "You'd want to be on her, the Atlanta
Belle?"
  "Yes."
  "Then, Edward, let's discuss what you think can
be bettered with that woman in the morning, that gives
me time to think. If we agree, then please go
quickly to Hong Kong ... and hurry back,
quickly."
  "Good. But your answer to my proposal?"
  "I will give you that when you return."
  "I must have it before I leave."
  "Why?"
  "For my pleasure," he said.
  She saw the same strange smile and wondered
what was behind it. "Why? Seriously?"
  He got up and stood over her. "Because it's
vital to me. If you'll marry me the sky's the
limit, you'll adore Shanghai, it's the
greatest city in Asia, makes Hong Kong like a
backwater, you'll be the toast of the town and live
happily ever after. I promise. Now, please
promise."
  "I promise to give you my answer when you
return, there should be trust between us," she said and he
remembered saying the same thing to Tess. "When you
return."
  "Sorry, my dear Angelique, I need
to know before I go."
  "Or you won't negotiate for me, with
Tess?"
  He did not answer at once. "I'll
negotiate for you. And I'd like to marry you tomorrow,
tonight--nothing to do with Tess, but that's not possible."
He went closer and held her shoulders
in his hands, and kissed the tip of her nose.
"Jolie Mademoiselle, an answer
please? By sunset tomorrow? I'll have to board then.
An answer before God."

  That afternoon the news about Katsumata and
Meikin's suicide reached Raiko in her
private quarters. She fainted. When she had
begun to recover, she sent a maid to ask
Hiraga to find Akimoto and Takeda
urgently, there were terrible facts to report. They
came quickly.
  Weeping unashamed and wringing her hands she told
them about Yoshi capturing Katsumata, about his
death and that of Meikin, Koiko's mama-san, but
not that she had betrayed him. "This is the end ...
if Yoshi found out about Katsumata and Meikin,
he knows about me, about you, we're all betrayed.
Who's the traitor? It's only a matter of
time ..." Again her terror soared. "You must all
leave at once before Enforcers discover you ... you
must leave ..."
  "Stop!" Hiraga hissed, face chalky,
no longer disguised as a kitchen skivvy. He was
wearing an ordinary kimono and was ready to rush for
his tunnel sanctuary, the lookouts reliable now
on pain of death. Akimoto and Takeda were also
devastated. That Katsumata could die a coward
was inconceivable.
  I cannot believe the Sensei would allow himself
to be caught alive, Hiraga thought. And for
Yoshi to allow Meikin to do that to him was disgusting,
however merited. Baka to be caught alive!
"Leave us, Raiko. I will see you later."
  "Thank you, sire, so sorry but ..."
  "Leave us!"
  She stumbled away, glad to be free of them,
hating all shishi, wisely hiding the hatred.
  Takeda spat in anger. "Yoshi has no
honor to let that happen. Katsumata must be
avenged!"
  Akimoto glanced at Hiraga, sickened
too. "What should we do, Cousin? That old crone
is right, the search will be stepped up. We should
slip away tonight, try to, eh?"
  "You are baka! We are surrounded like rats
on a carcass." In fact Hiraga, though
pretending rage, was weak with relief. With
Katsumata dead, now there need be no attack.
Once again he was in charge of his own
destiny. "We must not make a mistake."
  Takeda said, "I agree we are rats in a
trap here. So we attack as the Sensei
planned. We've the bombs now.
Sonno-joi!"
  "No. We're safe for the moment."
  Akimoto said, "Hiraga, if Yoshi gave
Katsumata to this Meikin, it was a reward,
neh? In return for betraying him? Raiko will
do the same to us. Maybe she is the traitor who
betrayed both of them to Yoshi in the first place,
eh?"
  Takeda scrambled up. "Let's kill her and
begin."
  "Sit down," Hiraga snarled. "We need
Raiko. She has proved her worth in the past,
and you forget, no mama-san is trusted wholly.
Sit down, Takeda, be logical. She will not
betray us--she is only a money-grubbing
harridan, like any other mama-san who, if you
let her, will charge you for a third-rank whore when
the girl's only a streetwalker worth hardly
a copper momme. Meikin gave us good information
in the past, it was because of her we caught Utani the
pedarist. She herself was betrayed. Yoshi and
Bakufu have thousands of spies."
  "We're not safe here." Akimoto shuddered.
"I hate this place. This gai-jin Yoshiwara
is infected with their plague. I vote with
Takeda. Attack, escape or die."
  "Not yet. Let me think!"
  Takeda watched him narrowly. "You knew this
Meikin?"
  "Many years ago ..." Hiraga almost added,
and Koiko, tempted to tell them the real reason
for the betrayal, but decided not to, relishing the
manner of Katsumata's death. Now Sumomo
is revenged and so is Koiko. Now their spirits will
become kami, or they will be reborn again on the
thirty-first day as the gods decide--if there are
gods. Now I can forget them though they will all
live forever.
  The Sensei begging for mercy? All those years
idolizing him, listening to him? We were dupes, he
thought, disgusted. Never mind, that coward will be
derided and spat on in news sheets, and soon
bards and plays will orate the story how he
betrayed Sumomo and Koiko and the mama-san's
revenge--and death wish. Ah, what style she
had!
  Involuntarily he chuckled nervously and
mimicked the high-pitched voice of an
onnagata--a male actor who specialized
in female roles, only men being allowed on the
stage. ""A bath and clean clothes.
Please?"' Kabuki and puppet theatres will
fill houses with that for generations!"
  "Baka on the kabuki," Takeda said,
fuming. "The Sensei will be revenged. Honor will
be redeemed. Tonight we attack as planned, you
take the ship, I take the church and the other church
and kill every gai-jin I meet till I am
dead. What do you say Akimoto?" He got
up and peered out of the window. Night was not far.
Suddenly he noticed the wind rustling the shrubs.
"Look! It's a sign from the gods! The wind
is picking up. It's from the south!"
  Akimoto leapt beside him. "It's true,
Hiraga!"
  For a moment Hiraga was thrown off balance. Was
it a sign? "No attack, not tonight. No
attack!"
  Takeda whirled. "I say attack." He
glared at Akimoto. "You agree?
Sonno-joi!"
  Akimoto was teetering. Both Takeda's
rage and confidence were infectious. "Fire would
cover our escape, Hiraga."
  "A, a little one, perhaps," Hiraga said
irritably, "not an attempt to burn all
Yokohama." His brain was oscillating and he
had no solution yet other than his final plan,
and no way to effect that without Taira's help and
purging Yoshi's grasp from around his neck. "Tomorrow
or the next day, we cou--"
  "Tonight," Takeda said insistently, his anger
barely in check. "Tonight's a gift, the gods
speak to us!"
  "At this time of the year the wind will hold. We
need more men to fire the Settlement. One of us should
go to Yedo for them. Takeda, you could go."
  "How? You said Enforcers are everywhere. How?"
  "I don't know, Takeda." Shakily
Hiraga got up. "Wait till I get
back, then we can decide. I'll see
Raiko, tell her we'll leave tomorrow--we
won't but that's what I'll say."
  "She's not to be trusted anymore."
  "I keep telling you, she never was."
Hiraga went and found her.
  "All right, Hiraga-sama, you may stay."
Raiko was over the panic, brandy in her stomach,
dully allowing fate to be fate.
  "Is Taira here tonight?"
  "No, nor tomorrow. Furansu-san is. I know
he is."
  "Send for Taira. You can do that, can't you?"
  "Yes, and when he arrives what should I tell
him?" she said listlessly, then jerked awake as
Hiraga ground the words through his teeth. "You tell
him, Raiko, that Fujiko has decided she no
longer wishes to sign a contract, that another
gai-jin has approached you with a better business
arrangement."
  "But her contract price is fantastical
good, he is no fool, he'll compare prices and
I'll lose him to another house, he's already
visited some. I'll lose him."
  "You will lose your head if the turmoil you're
in isn't solved," he said sourly, "and the rest of
your well-fed corpse will be feeding fishes."
  "Solved?" She became all attention. "There
is a chance, Hiraga-sama? I've a chance?
You know of a way?"
  "Do as you're told and I may be able to save
you. Send for Taira now." Coldly, Hiraga
looked at her and went back to the other two. They
were on the veranda watching the bushes bent by the wind.
"We're safe for a day or two."
  Takeda said with a sneer, "Little does she know
she's dead, and tonight Yokohama will be dead,
cleaned of vermin."
  "We will delay one day. Tomorrow night is
best."
  Takeda's anger began to return. "Why?"
  "Do you want a chance of escape? To deal the
death blow but live to enjoy it? All of us? I
agree with you it is time. You are right, Takeda.
But tomorrow gives me time to plan."
  After a moment, Takeda said, "Akimoto?"
  "Let us agree to delay. To escape as
well ... Hiraga's wise, Takeda,
neh?"
  The silence grew immense. "Delay. One
day. I agree." Takeda got up and left for
his hideaway in the next Teahouse.
  After a moment, Hiraga said, "Akimoto, in
a little while, go and sit with him, reassure him."
  "He's Satsuma, Cousin. Katsumata was
Satsuma."
  Hiraga glanced at the shrubs bent by the south
wind. "Sit with him. Reassure him."

  Tyrer was appalled. "No contract,
Raiko-san?"
  "No, so sorry, Fujiko has changed her
mind and has a much better offer, so sorry but
she's adamant."
  "Please?" he asked, missing most of her
Japanese.
  She repeated it, adding, "That's why I asked
to see you urgently. So sorry, she won't see
you, tonight or ever."
  All of Tyrer's being plunged into a pit.
He questioned her in his most polite and best
Japanese but she shook her head. "So
sorry," she said with finality, bowing a dismissal.
"Good night, Taira-sama."
  As if a drunkard, Tyrer went out onto the
veranda. The shoji slid shut. He stumbled onto
the garden path, cursed as he realized he had
forgotten his shoes. In a daze he sat on the
veranda and slipped them on. "What the hell's
happened?"
  Three days ago, when he had returned with
Babcott from Yedo, all had been perfect, the
contract agreed but for one minor point, payment was
to be made within the week. His previous bill had
been settled to smiles and bows, with Fujiko that
night more loving and sweeter than ever before. This
evening, when Raiko had sent a servant to the
house he shared with Babcott, asking him to see
her urgently, he had presumed, amused, it was
just to sign the paper. He had left a message
earlier that probably he could not come tonight nor would
he be available tomorrow--he was due to go
to Kanagawa.
  And now this. "I don't understand." Gusts
swirling more leaves around his feet. Miserably,
he pulled his coat closer around him. The night
seemed blacker than before. With a great sigh he
got up and plodded down the meandering path, stopped
abruptly as a samurai almost bumped into him.
  "Christ Almighty, Nakama!" he burst
out.
  Hiraga went for his sword and Tyrer thought he
was a dead man. But the sword stayed half in the
scabbard and he saw the eyes staring at him on a
hair trigger ... "Don't," Tyrer said, his
voice choked at the sudden apparition,
"I'm ... I'm not armed." He raised his arms
in surrender, froze, cursing himself for his
stupidity, almost died again as Hiraga slammed the
sword back into its scabbard.
  "Taira-sama, I not hurt you, I thought you
enemy. You are friend." Hiraga smiled and stuck
out his hand.
  Blankly Tyrer shook it then erupted,
"What are you doing, we thought you'd fled to Yedo,
what's this about being ronin? We have to turn you over
to him, to Yoshi, you know Yoshi is after you, Lord
Yoshi?"
  "Not here!" Hiraga cautioned and took his arm
and Tyrer felt the iron grip, "Come with me."
Motioning him to silence, he guided him down
another path, into another in the maze of little
pathways well screened from each other by hedges,
until Tyrer had lost all sense of direction.
Then this path ended at a bungalow. Wind tugged
at the thatch, whining in the rafters.
  Hiraga motioned him onto the veranda, kicked
off his own shoes and waited until Tyrer had
done the same then pushed him forward. "Inside,
p'rease."
  Wet with fear and powerless, Tyrer obeyed. There
was no chance to run. He saw Hiraga look
carefully to see if they had been followed. The
shoji slid to. A shaded candle dimly lit the
interior of the usual one-room house, a tiny
bathroom adjoining. The flame guttered and almost
went out in the draft.
  "Sit! P'rease. Now, say again but not fast,
keep voice down." Ominously Hiraga took
his short sword out of his belt and laid it on the
tatami beside him. "So?"
  Trying to contain the shaking that mixed nauseatingly
with his distress, Tyrer related about Yoshi and
Abeh and the murder of Utani and how they all
thought Hiraga had fled elsewhere. "We've got
to turn you over to Yoshi, to guards at the gate--
Captain Abeh went back to Yedo, Nakama,
and ... what should I call you, Nakama or
Hiraga?"
  "As you wishes, Taira-sama."
  "Hiraga then, that's your real name isn't it?"
  "I am caw'red that. But Japanese have many
names, one at birth, another when age seven,
another at manhood, and take another if
want. I am Nakama, or Hiraga, your
friend."
  "Friend?" Tyrer said bitterly, forgetting his
fear. "Why didn't you tell me you were an
assassin. You killed Utani, you killed him,
didn't you?"
  "Yes, he a target, very bad man. Yoshi
another. This not Ing'rand, Taira-sama, not
Ing'rand. These bad men, the Bakufu, they thief
power from the Emperor, they tyrants."
  Solemnly, Hiraga explained as best he
could about the shishi and their struggle to eliminate the
despotic government--his sincerity obvious--
explaining the greed of Utani and his rapacious
taxes, how the Toranaga clans and daimyos
possessed all the wealth of the land, the
Toranagas most of all, about the corrupt
Bakufu, and that the people were starved and powerless. "We
want give Nippon back to Emperor, make
govern fair for a'wre people."
  By "all people" Hiraga meant all
samurai though Tyrer took it to mean all
Japanese. And as he questioned Hiraga,
fascinated with this unique window into the inner workings
of Nippon--and Japanese mentality--he was more
and more convinced there was merit on Hiraga's side.
He had only to consider English history and the
people's struggle to cast off the "divine right of
Kings" and the rule of tyrants, to become more and more
sympathetic. Not hard to recall the huge cost in
lives to create Parliament and the rule of the people for the
people: a king's head, others humbled, revolution,
riots, deaths before the British Raj and Pax
Britannica had blossomed.
  Remembering also the debt he owed this man, he
said gloomily, "Even so, I don't see any
hope for you. The moment you're seen you'll be
captured, by your people or mine. There's nothing I can
do to prevent that."
  Hiraga took a deep breath and launched
himself into the void: "One thing, yes, you can do
to he'rp me. He'rp me on to ship, ship for
Ing'rand."
  Tyrer gaped at him. "Eh? You're mad!"
  "P'rease, keep soft, many enemy here,"
Hiraga said quietly, passionately excited
with this stunning, radical idea that had swooped out
of the air at him, as if down from the Sun
Goddess herself. "P'rease 'risten. Many times you
say me 'rearn about gai-jin, your country best,
neh? I go there with my cousin. We 'rearn best
way to make govern, your Par'iment.
We 'rearn your way. Yoshi right about navy and
army, but I think more best to 'rearn banking and
business and trading. We need knowing best way,
neh? Your way, Ing'rish way, neh?"
  Eloquently Hiraga continued to spin his web,
his anxiety lending him extra words and soft
cadences. This was his final plan, his only
possible escape from Yoshi's trap. He was
certain that a year or two spent with gai-jin, with the
right introductions and help would be of enormous
value to sonno-joi.
  It is the perfect answer to inevitable death if
I stay, he had reasoned exuberantly. In a
year or two we will return, perfect Ing'rish
speakers, bursting with their secrets about
produk'shun and stoku markit, rifles,
cannon, tactics, strategy, the methods they
used to conqueror the outside world, even to humble
China!
  This is the Land of the Gods! China should be ours,
not the gai-jin's. Before I leave I'll tell
our Choshu shishi leaders of my plan, and somehow
keep in touch through letters. "It's simp're,
Taira-sama. You speak to Captain, we sneak
aboard no prob'rem. No one need know."
  "Sir William would never agree."
  "Perhaps no need speak him." Hiraga leaned
closer, giving him the option, unsure of himself.
"Or if speak, I speak too, think he
agree, neh? Very important for Ing'rish have
Japan friend. I good friend. Jami-sama, he
he'rp too if ask."
  "Who?"
  "Jami, big beard man, bigger as you.
Jami."
  "Jamie? Jamie McFay?"
  "Yes, Jami Mukfey."
  Now that the idea had sunk into him, Tyrer's
mind began working better. There were tremendous
long-term possibilities in doing what
Hiraga suggested. It had ever been British
policy to educate--re-educate--selected
foreign students, the more important or princely
the better. Many were radicals, or
revolutionaries in their own country, India
notably. Hiraga was very intelligent and if an
enemy of Yoshi, important. Judge a man
by his enemies, his father had said.
  And while he chewed over Hiraga's
suggestion he also wondered how his father and
mother were, and his friends, sad that he could not see them
or be in London soon--no home leave for
two years. At the same time he was proud to be
part of the Diplomatic Service and a cog,
albeit very small, in the vastness of British
Empire building.
  Hiraga's idea is good. It would work. But
how to get him out and how to get Sir William
to assist--Willie's the key.
  The more he thought about it, the more his hopes sank,
the more he had to admit he was stupid to even consider
it, becoming more and more certain that Sir William
would not, could not countenance such a ploy--not with this
man, an admitted killer, not Hiraga who was
a pawn in the far greater contest for Yoshi. There was
no quid pro quo for Sir William--no
compensation, no reason to risk Yoshi's enmity, the
power of the future, whatever Hiraga claimed.
  "I'll try," he said, purporting to be
confident, not forgetting he was still Hiraga's
prisoner, the sword too near. "Can't
guarantee anything but I'll try. Where will you
be?"
  Hiraga was satisfied, his gamble immense
though with room left to maneuver. He had convinced
Taira, now again on his side. The gai-jin
leader would be an ally. "You keep sekret?"
  "Of course."
  "Send word to Raiko. I can meet in
vi'rage or here. You say where, Taira-sama.
Think sooner is better, for ship, neh?"
  "Yes. I'll send you a message tomorrow, or
come myself." Cautiously Tyrer began to stand.
  Hiraga beamed. "You go Fujiko?"
  Gloom descended instantly. "There's no
Fujiko anymore."
  "What? What you mean p'rease?"
  Tyrer told him and he saw Hiraga's
face flush.
  "But you have promise, Taira-sama. Me,
I t'awk, arrange with Raiko, neh?"
  "Yes, but now the contract's off. Raiko
says ..." Tyrer stopped, frightened by the look
on Hiraga's face.
  "Wait, p'rease!" Hiraga stormed out.
Tyrer peered out of a side window. No one in
sight, only waving branches and the smell of sea
salt in the air--run while you've the chance, he
told himself but then, suddenly, desperately, he
wanted to urinate. He used the
bucket in the bathroom and felt better. Now
he was hungry. And thirsty. He looked around.
No teapot, no water jug. His hunger and
thirst were grinding--like Hiraga's idea was
grinding. No way to satisfy either. Without Sir
William's benevolence Hiraga would be a child in
the wilderness. Even Jamie couldn't help much,
now that he was out of Struan's. Why should he or
anyone help? There was no quid pro quo. Again
he peered out of the little window.
  Get out while you can, he thought and went for the
door. Then he heard footsteps. He rushed
back to his cushion. The shoji was flung open.
Raiko was shoved on her knees in front of
him, Hiraga towering menacingly in the doorway.
  "Oh so sorry, Taira-sama," Raiko
said, stumbling over the words in abject haste
to apologize and placate him, "oh so sorry,
I made a terrible mistake. ..."
  Her words were a fountain. Tyrer understood little of
them though he got their message clearly.
"Enough," he said firmly. "Bring contract now.
I sign."
  Meekly she brought out the scroll from her
sleeve and offered it.
  "Wait," Hiraga ordered. "Give it
to me!"
  She obeyed instantly and put her head down
again. He scanned the short document, grunted.
"This as agree, Taira-sama, you sign
'rater," he said in English again. "This person
..." he pointed angrily at Raiko, "says
make mistake, says Fujiko begs honor
to see you now, so sorry for the mistake. Her
mistake. Baka!" he snapped at her, adding
in Japanese, "Treat this lord properly or
I'll destroy this Teahouse! Make sure
Fujiko is ready, very ready. Now."
  "Hai, Hiraga-sama!" Mumbling
profuse apologies she fled.
  Once safely away, she chortled,
delighted with her performance, with Hiraga's ploy,
and that the deal was done.
  Tyrer, elated, thanked Hiraga too
happy to worry about how his obvious friend had
changed her so quickly. We'll never understand some
things about these people. "I'll sign the contract and
bring it back tomorrow."
  "Take time, keep woman dog waiting."
Hiraga smiled and gave him the
scroll. "Now I take you Fujiko.
Ikimasho."
  "Domo arigato gozaimashita."
Tyrer bowed as a Japanese would bow to someone owed
a considerable favor.
  "Friend he'rp friend," Hiraga said simply.

                 

  Later that evening Tyrer awoke, completely
satisfied. His timepiece read 9:20.
Perfect, he thought. He lay beside Fujiko who
was fast asleep, the futons and feather coverlets
as clean and sweet-smelling as she was, warm and
comfortable--so much better than his bed, rough straw
mattress and heavy woolen blankets with their
dank smell. The sheen of her skin was golden in
the candlelight, the tiny room golden and snug,
with the wind worrying the roof and shoji walls and
flames.
  Another short nap, he thought, and then I'll
leave.
  Don't be silly. There's no need to go back
tonight. All papers for tomorrow's Yoshi meeting are
ready, a copy of the Treaty in Japanese and
English in Wee Willie's briefcase and
double-checked this afternoon. The agreed battle plan
against Sanjiro of Satsuma is ready in the
safe for his and Ketterer's signature. I'll
be up with the dawn, bright as a mint-new golden
guinea--after the Hiraga shock-u and Raiko's
bigger shock-u I deserve a treat. He
smiled, shock-u, sounding so Japanese. A
contented sigh, good old Nakama, I mean
Hiraga. He yawned and closed his eyes. And
nestled closer. Fujiko did not awaken but
opened herself to him.
  In another part of the gardens Hinodeh waited
impatiently for Andr`e, due any moment now,
Raiko had warned, almost ill with anticipation.
  Raiko was slouched in her own quarters, drinking
sak`e. Soon she would turn to brandy and
to oblivion, the drink swilling away all bad
thoughts: her fear and loathing for Hiraga and her
hopes for him, her terror over Meikin and
esteem for her revenge intermingled with each emptied
cup.
  Across the garden, hidden in his safe house
Hiraga sat in the classic Lotus position
meditating to clear the foul headache that the
Katsumata news and Tyrer had caused.
Soon Akimoto would return. Then he would
decide about Takeda.
  Over the next fence in a garden house of the
Teahouse of Cherries, Akimoto was sak`e
drunk. Lolling across from him, Takeda belched and
quaffed his beer. Another sak`e flask was
emptied blearily until it slid from
Akimoto's fingers. His head drifted to his
arms. He began to snore. Takeda smiled, not
nearly as drunk as he had pretended.
  When he was sure Akimoto was asleep, he
slid the shoji open and closed it after him. The
night was cold, the wind strong from the south. It
whipped around him, ruffling his thatch of
uncomfortable, stubbled hair. He scratched
vigorously checking the part of the gardens he could
see. A maid with a tray hurried from a
bungalow to the main building. In the distance he
heard men singing drunkenly and a samisen. Somewhere
a dog barked. When the maid had vanished, he
put on his dark padded jacket, stuck his
swords in his belt, stepped into his straw
sandals and darted down the path, turned onto
another, then another until he was near the fence.
His cache was under a bush. Five bombs that he and
Hiraga had made, with fuses of various
lengths.
  The bombs were constructed from two sections of
giant bamboo tied together, a third of a yard
long, half that wide, the hollows of one packed
tightly with Katsumata's extra gunpowder, the
other with oil, and plugged. Quickly he fused three
bombs using the longest fuses he had, about a
candle of time each--nearly two hours. The
fuses were made of cotton rope, impregnated
with a gunpowder solution and allowed to dry. He
armed the remaining two with fuses for half that time.
  A last look at the sky. Clouds raced with the
wind. Good. He picked up two long-fused
bombs and was gone, melding nicely with the night,
through the secret fence door into the garden of the Three
Carp that was south of the Cherries and headed for the
southernmost garden house, like all of them, raised
half a yard on low pilings. It was occupied and
illuminated. Warily he crawled under it. He
lit the fuse with a flint, the noise deadened by the
wind. The fuse caught. A woman's footstep
sounded above and he froze. Sound of the shoji being
opened. After a moment it closed again.
  Errant leaves heaped over the spluttering
fuse concealed it almost completely and once more he
was away, a shadow amongst shadows--to duck into the
shrubbery seeing a gai-jin coming down the path. The
man passed without noticing him, then again he was in
motion, running for the main Teahouse building.
Another fire bomb was settled there neatly.
  Now back through the fence, avoiding a servant,
waiting for a portly old maid to trundle by,
reaching the cache, there to collect the last of the
long-fuse bombs and hastening away again. This he
lit and placed under his own house, Akimoto's
snores rumbling above. Takeda's lips drew
back with his smile. A last time he darted back
to the cache, sweating and euphoric. So far, all
according to Ori's plan. Hiraga was gai-jin
infected. So was Akimoto. He was not. He would
do it alone.
  With the remaining bombs he went across the garden and
over the fence to the next and to the next and there was the
secret well head. Quickly he went down into it,
replacing the cover, no need to fear that Hiraga
was below.
  In the tunnel and safe he began to breathe again
and lit the oil lamp. Scattered around were
Hiraga's bed and few possessions.
Katsumata's knapsack with the metal-cased
bombs was under a blanket. He added his own
two, shouldered the bag and hurried down the
tunnel. Soon the water barrier was ahead.
Quickly he was out of his clothes, tying them into a
bundle.
  The freezing water made him struggle for
breath. When he reached the narrowest part where the roof
sank toward the water, his head was just below it and the
water not quite to his chin. With difficulty he
managed to hold the lamp and knapsack above the
surface. On the other side he dressed
hurriedly, shivering and cursing, still so much to do.
Never mind, he had begun. Soon he would be
finished and then would live forever. His fervor warmed
him and drove the cold away.
  At the far end where iron bars led upwards and the
well vanished below, he stopped to collect his
breath. Now upwards. Once he slipped, almost
fell but regained his hold and held on until his
heart stopped racing. Up again. With great care he
moved the broken cover aside and peered out. No
Man's Land was empty. Drunk Town was busy
with slavering and shouts and drunken singing,
a few men reeling along alleys not far away,
dogs barking at them.
  Drunk Town was south of the village and the
Settlement that hugged the coast on a south-north
line, as the Yoshiwara was generally southwards of
Drunk Town. Ori first, then Katsumata and
Hiraga had planned where to plant the fire
initiators so that a wind from the south would drive the
flames before it to consume all in its path.
  He left the knapsack in the weeds, and
secreted one short-fused bomb against a
rickety godown, the other behind a hovel.
Rubbish covered the smoking fuses.
  Hurrying back for the remaining bombs he had
to slump into hiding near a pile of rubbish.
Approaching from the village a patrol of
soldiers was making their nightly rounds. Their
route went from the British Legation, along High
Street, through the village, across No Man's
Land, down through Drunk Town and back along the
promenade again. Twice nightly. When they
reached the alley, thirty yards from him, they
stopped in the lee of the godown for a smoke and
to relieve themselves.
  Takeda cursed, pinned down.
  More than three quarters of a candle had passed
since lighting the first fuse.

  "Good evening, Hinodeh," Andr`e said earlier
when he had arrived at their garden sanctuary.
"Sorry I late."
  "Good evening, Furansu-san. You are never
late. Whatever you do is correct." Smiling
at him. "Will you take sak`e?"
  "Please." He sat opposite and watched
her pour, his legs in the space under the table where a
small brazier warmed the air, the heat kept in
by the eiderdown that was spread over the table and
wrapped around them. Her grace was ever more pleasing,
hair like glistening jet held with decorative
pins, a touch of rouge to her lips, her long
sleeves held delicately away from the
flask.
  Tonight she wore a kimono he had never seen
before, a glorious shade of green, his favorite
color, with cranes, the symbol of long life,
embroidered in silver thread all over, the edge
of a sheer under-kimono peeping out enticingly. With a
bow she handed him the cup and then, to his
surprise, poured for herself from another
flask that contained warm sak`e--his was cold as
he preferred. It was rare for her to drink.
  With a special smile, she lifted her cup.
"A ta sant`e, ch@eri, je t'aime."
She copied his accent as he had taught her.
  "A ta sant`e, ch@erie, je
t'aime," he said, an ache in his heart, not
believing that she did, how could she?
  They clinked cups and she drained hers, choked
a little, at once poured for him again and for herself. The
same smile and she offered her cup to touch his.
They drained them and again she poured.
  "Mon Dieu, Hinodeh, you careful,
yes?" he said with a laugh. "Not used to sak`e.
Careful, no become drunk!"
  She laughed, sparkling white teeth,
voluptuous lips. "Please, Furansu-san,
tonight is special. Drink and be merry.
Please." She sipped this time, looking at him
over the lip, her eyes alight and flashing in the
dance of candle flames, eyes he always found
fathomless, always keeping him off balance--part of
her fascination.
  "Why special, Hinodeh?"
  "Today is Sei-ji-no-Hi, Coming of Age
Day--for all persons who have reached twenty years
--you have reached twenty, neh?" she said
happily, then pointed to the big candle on the
table. "This candle I dedicated to my village
god Ujigami for you." Then she motioned to the
door shoji. Just above it was a bouquet of pine and
bamboo. "That is a Kadamatsu, symbolizing
stability." A shy smile and she poured and
drank again. "I hope you approve."
  "Oh yes, thank you, Hinodeh," he said
warmed.
  A few weeks ago he had discovered it was her
birthday and brought iced champagne with a golden
bracelet. She wrinkled her nose against the
bubbles and said it was wonderful, but drank it only
when he insisted. He had finished most of the
bottle and that night his lovemaking had been
frenzied.
  Over their time together he had noticed that the
violence of his thrusts did not disturb her, she
responded equally whatever he did and, at
length, lay back with him as drained. But how much
she really enjoyed their joining he could never fathom,
nor could he savor her and leave it at that, leave
her to her pretense if that's what it
really was--and forget the enigma she had become.
One day he would penetrate that enigma. He was
convinced. It only required patience, that was
all. He would wear away the shell of the enigma and
then their loving and his frantic, insatiable passion
would be calmed and he could live in peace.
  She was still everything to him. Nothing else
mattered. This afternoon he had humbled himself with
Angelique and cajoled and begged and pleaded and
menaced until she had given him a brooch in
lieu of money. Raiko had accepted it.
  Angelique's stupid. Why is she wavering?
Of course she should accept Tess Struan's
offer, buying her off, and quickly before it's withdrawn.
The offer's generous, overgenerous, more than I
expected considering her untenable position: no will
in her favor and anyway no estate to claim
against! Five hundred guineas as a down payment
in three weeks! Wonderful--a gift from God!
She can spare four hundred of that and I'll
arrange moneylenders to advance another thousand against
her trust, two thousand, whatever I need.
Skye's a fool. She'll settle after I've
talked to her, and gratefully accept any advance
when I suggest it. I'm saved!
  Looking at Hinodeh, he beamed, so
joyously.
  "What?" She fanned herself against the rising
alcoholic flush, the tip of her tongue between her
teeth.
  In French he said, "I'm home free, my
love, soon you're paid for and all mine forever."
  "So sorry I do not understand."
  Reverting to Japanese he said, "Tonight I just
happy, and say, you mine. You so pretty, you
mine."
  She bowed her head at his praise. "You are
handsome too and I am glad when you are happy with
me."
  "Always." But this was not true. Frequently he
was angry and stormed away. Always the same
problem, a chance remark, leading to asking, then
taunting, pleading, demanding, begging, shouting:
"We don't need darkness! We're lovers and
we don't need the dark anymore, we're friends
as well as lovers, I am committed to you forever.
Forever! I love you, you can never know how much I
love you, you can't know, I keep asking and asking
and asking but you just sit there ..."
  Always the same patient, abject
response, head to the floor, her voice soft,
with or without tears, and absolute: "Please
excuse me but you agreed, so sorry but you
agreed."
  Again she drank and he saw the increasing blush
in her cheeks, watched her pour again, her fingers
unsure and a drop spilled. She caught her
breath with a chuckle. "Oh so sorry." His cup
filled again, and hers, quickly drained, her
tipsiness making her even more alluring. "Oh,
that's very good, very very good, neh, Furansu-san?"
  Long fingers with perfect nails shaking the
flask and finding it empty, at once
gracefully to her feet, the overlong kimono
trailing, making her seem to glide to the brazier
where other flasks sat in simmering water, and, on
a ledge outside the tiny window, where others
cooled. Wind came into the room momentarily and,
with it an unexpected odor. Gunpowder smoke,
faint but unmistakable. "What's that?" he said in
French.
  She looked at him startled. "Please?"
  Now that the window was back in place the odor
had vanished. "Nothing, I thought ..." Tonight
everything about her enticed him. "Nothing, please
sit. Here."
  Obediently she sat beside him, bumping him,
chuckling. Unsteadily she poured again. Amused,
he drank with her, the sak`e warming but not as she was
warmed. Under the blanket her leg touched his.
His hand went to her, the other around her waist and they
kissed, her lips whisper soft and moist, her
tongue sensuous. His hand went higher, she broke
from the embrace, laughing. "Wait, wait, not
here, tonight ..."
  Like an excited schoolgirl she pushed away,
lifted herself and went for the bedroom and its single
lamp, as always to blow it out and then, when she was
ready in the darkness, to invite him in. But tonight she
stopped at the doorway, steadied herself against it,
then turned, eyes glowing. "Furansu-san."
  Watching him, she hummed as she removed the
long pins in her hair and let it cascade to her
waist. Now she loosed her obi and let it
fall. A chuckle. Then her kimono and let that
fall. All at once he was breathless,
transfixed. The gold of her under-kimono
shimmered with the candle flames, the sheer silk
revealed but did not. Again the tip of her tongue
toyed with her lips. Coquettishly
she loosed the ties and let the under-kimono open
slightly. No underclothes beneath. Only the narrow
line of her body revealed, from neck to tiny
feet. And all the time the enigmatic smile and
eyes beckoning, compelling him to wait,
promising, tantalizing. Wind rustled the shojis
but went unheard.
  His heart was pounding as never before. He forced himself
to remain seated. Now he could see her chest rising
and falling, the nipples of her small breasts
hard against the silk. Then she sighed. With perfect
grace she let this covering slowly slide away
and stood there in all her purity.
  For him time stopped. Hardly breathing he
gloried in her gift, so unexpected and given so
freely. When he could endure the waiting no
longer he got to his feet. His arms were gentle
and he kissed her with all the passion he
possessed, strong against her, she limp in his
arms. Easily he lifted her and laid her on
the futons in the bedroom and tore off his clothes.
And knelt beside her, gazing at her in ecstasy in
the light. "Je t'aime, je t'aime."
  "Look, Furansu-san," she said, lying there
with her lovely smile. Her fingers were pointing at
the inside of her thigh. For a moment he did not
understand. Then he saw the abrasion. His heart almost
leapt out of his chest, bile flooding into his mouth.
"Look," she said again, so softly, smile
constant, eyes so dark in the small light. "It
has begun."
  "It, it nothing," he said, his voice choked.
"Nothing."
  "It is everything." She looked up at him.
"Please give me the knife."
  His head reeled, his eyes blind but for the sight of the
sore that filled the world. With a gigantic effort
he shook his head to clear it. And forced his eyes
to see. But this did not take away the vile,
sick sour taste. "It's nothing, it is just, it's
nothing, nothing at all," he croaked. The
closer he looked the less important the
blemish appeared. "Just a chaff mark that's
all."
  "Please? You must speak Japanese,
Furansu-san, so sorry."
  "It ... it not illness. Not that. Just, just tight
loincloth, nothing worry." He reached out to cover
her and blow out the light but she stopped him.
Gently.
  "So sorry, it has begun. Please. Give
me the knife."
  As always his knife was in the sheath on his belt.
As always. With his clothes, behind him. "No,
please, Hinodeh, no knife, knife bad,
no need knife. That, that mark nothing."
  Through his nightmare, he saw her shake her
head, kindly, and repeat the request that had
become a command. His limbs began trembling, his
head to twitch uncontrollably, no way to stop
them or the mumbling incoherent litany of French
and Japanese that poured out that begged and pleaded and
explained that the little spot was a blemish, nothing more
though he knew it was not nothing. It had begun.
She was right. It had begun, it had begun. His
stomach heaved. He just managed to stop himself
vomiting, mumbling on and on.
  She did not interrupt, worse, only lay
patiently, waiting for the fit to pass. Then there
would be a resolution.
  He said, brokenly, "Listen, Hinodeh,
please no knife. Please. Cannot ... That ...
it nothing. Soon go away. Look me, look!"
Desperately he pointed at himself. "Nothing,
nowhere. That little, soon go. No knife. We
live. No afraid. Happy. Yes?"
  He saw a shadow cross her face, again her
fingers touched the abrasion, again the same sweetly
monotonous "It has begun."
  He fixed a smile and did not know it was
grotesque, and as much as he cajoled and twisted
and turned, she kept asking the same question,
gently, politely, infuriating him more and more
until he was near exploding. "It nothing," he
said hoarsely. "Understand?"
  "Yes, I understand. But it has begun.
Neh?"
  He stared at her, his face mean, then his rage
broke, and he shouted, "For Christ's sake,
yes! Yes, YES! Hai!"
  Through a great silence, she said, "Thank you,
Furansu-san. Then please, as you agree it
has begun, as you have promised, please give me
the knife."
  His eyes were bloodshot, the corners of his mouth
flecked with foam, sweat pouring off him and he was
near madness. His mouth opened and his mouth said with
finality what he always knew he would say: "No
knife. Kinjiru! It-is-forbidden! Cannot.
Cannot. You too value. Forbidden. No
knife."
  "You refuse?" Gently asked, no change in
her.
  "Hinodeh, you sun, my sun my moon.
Cannot. Will not. Never never never. Forbidden. You
stay. Please. Je t'aime."
  "Please, the knife."
  "No."
  A long sigh. Docilely she bowed to him, a
light gone out in her, and fetched a damp towel
and a dry one and knelt beside the bed. "Here,
Sire."
  Scowling, sweat-stained, he watched her. "You
agree?"
  "Yes, I agree. If that is your wish."
  He caught her hand. She let it lie in
his. "Truly agree?"
  "If you wish it. Whatever you wish," she said but
sadly.
  "No ask knife, ever again?"
  "I agree. It is over, Furansu-san,
if that is your wish." Her voice was gentle, her
face in repose, different yet the same,
shadows of sadness there. "Please stop now. It
is over. I promise I will not ask ever again,
please excuse me."
  The weight came off him. He went weak with
relief. "Oh Hinodeh, je t'aime,
thank you, thank you," he said, his voice breaking,
"but please no sad, no sad. Je t'aime,
thank you."
  "Please do not thank me. It is your wish."
  "Please no sad, Hinodeh. I promise
all be very good now. Wonderful. I promise."
  She nodded slowly. A sudden smile washed
her face and all the sad away. "Yes, and I
thank you, and yes, no more sad."
  She waited while he dried himself then removed
the towels. His eyes followed her, feasting on her
and his victory. She padded across the tatami to the
other room and brought back their two sak`e
flasks. With a sweet smile she said, "Drink
from the flasks, better than cups. Mine hot,
yours cold. Thank you for buying my contract.
A ta sant`e."
  "A ta sant`e, je t'aime."
  "Ah, so ka! Je t'aime." She
drained the flask, choked a little, then laughed,
wiped some off her chin. "That was good, so good. Come
to bed." Gaily she slid under the
covers. "Come to bed, Furansu-san, you risk
a chill."
  The grand-tasting drink cleansed his mouth and took
away the death feeling he had had. Slowly he
moved the coverlet off her, aching for her.
"Please, no more dark. Please?"
  "If you wish it. No more dark. Except
to sleep, neh?"
  So gratefully, he bowed his head to the futon,
reborn, and thanked her and lay beside her, loving
her, craving her monstrously. His fingers reached for
her.
  "Ah, Furansu-san, may I rest first,
please?" she asked tenderly, as never before. "So
much passion has tired me. May I rest a
little, please? Later we ... later, neh?"
  His flaring disappointment that almost turned to fury
was difficult to contain. In a moment, as kindly as
he could, he said, "Of course." No longer
touching, he lay back.
  "Thank you, Furansu-san," she whispered
tiredly. "Please, can you reach the lamp? Turn
the flame down, I wish to sleep a little, only
a little while."
  He obeyed and lay back, loins tormented with
desire.
  In the darkness, she was more content than she had
been in years, content as in the days before her husband
died and they lived in their little Yedo house with their
son, the boy who was safe now, already with his
grandparents, accepted, protected, and growing up
samurai.
  Bad of Furansu-san not to give me the
knife as he promised. Despicable. But then
he is gai-jin and not to be trusted. Never mind,
I knew he would not keep his part of the bargain as
I have kept mine--whatever Raiko promised.
He lied when he signed, as she lied. Never
mind, never mind. I was prepared for both of them,
both liars.
  Her smile broadened. The old herbalist
did not lie. I tasted nothing, feel nothing, but
death is coursing in my body and only a few
minutes remain in this World of Tears.
  For me and for the Beast too. It was his choice.
He broke his promise. So the Unclean pays
for cheating me. He will cheat no other lady. And
goes to death unquenched!
  He stirred, hearing her light, odd laughter.
"What?"
  "Nothing. Later we will laugh together. No more
dark after tonight, Furansu-san. No more dark."

  Hiraga slammed his fist on the tatami,
tired of waiting for Akimoto. He went out into the
blustering night and trudged the paths through the garden
to the door in the fence. Through it to Takeda's house,
missing the turning the first time. On the veranda he
stopped. Snores came from within. "Akimoto,
Takeda?" he called out softly, not wanting
to open the shoji without warning, every one of them
dangerous if surprised.
  No answer. The snores continued. He slid
the door aside noiselessly. Akimoto was
slumped over the table, sak`e flasks and beer
bottles strewn over the floor. No sign of
Takeda. Angrily he shook Akimoto,
cursing him. The young man came out of his stupor
blearily, half awake. "What's the matter?"
The words were slurred, Hiraga's face out of
focus and swirling.
  "Where's Takeda? Wake up! Baka! Where
is Takeda?"
  "Don' know, just we ... just drinking ..."
  For a second Hiraga was transfixed, his
whole world turned over, then he rushed out and through the
garden to the fence and the cache.
  His mind fogged. Then their plan they all
knew, where the bombs would best be placed, surged
at him. Panic lent speed to his feet. He
peered under Takeda's house but could see nothing,
then he caught a wiff of gunpowder smoke and
ducked down and crawled between the low, stone
supports but the fuse was too well hidden, its
smoke dissipated by the stiff currents of air.
Out again and up into the room to shake Akimoto,
"Get up, wake up!" When the youth drunkenly
tried to shove him away, Hiraga struck him
across the face, openhanded, then again. Pain tore
him back to slurring consciousness.
  "Takeda's taken the bombs, he's firing the
Inn, there's one below ..." Hiraga dragged him
roughly to his feet. Mumbling, leaning on him,
Akimoto staggered out and fell down the steps
onto the garden path, the sound of the wind fierce.
At that moment the bomb exploded.
  The blast was small, enough to knock them over and
blow a hole in the floor, most of the noise
muffled by floor joists, and by the wind. But the
spray of ignited oil was deadly.
Flames gushed up and outwards.
  "Go into the tunnel and wait there," Hiraga
croaked hoarsely and ran. The shock of the blast
and such near death blew Akimoto's stupor
away. He started to run but the wind gathered some
embers and threw them at him. Frenzied he beat
at his clothes and backed off and by the time he looked
at the house once more it was an inferno--dry
rice husk tatamis, dry oiled-paper
screens, dry wood floor and beams and thatched
roof. As he watched the roof collapsed in a
shower of sparks that were swiftly sucked up and
driven by the wind to swoop on to the next dwelling.
The thatch caught. Fire bells began sounding--
maids, servants, clients, courtesans,
guards on the gate beginning to respond.
  Hiraga was racing down the path to the south-most
house. A few metres away the bomb went
off. The blast was smaller than before but it sent him
sprawling into the bushes, crashing his body against a
decorative stone dragon causing a cry of
pain, the explosion powerful enough to collapse a
whole corner of pilings and a corner of the house,
causing the dwelling to lurch and tip drunkenly.
A wall burst into flames.
  He forced himself up and without hesitation leapt on
to the veranda and crashed through the burning shoji wall,
the sprayed oil already working its mayhem inside,
smoke choking. His hands went to his face against the
scorching heat and he held his breath against the
smoke.
  He saw Tyrer blown to one side,
helplessly trying to grope to his hands and knees,
suffocating, surrounded by flames that in an instant
turned the oil-sprayed shoji wall behind him into a
sheet of fire. Other flames gorged on
oil-drenched walls and supports and roof and
licked at the remains of the futon and down
coverlet Tyrer lay on. The hem of his ripped
sleeping kimono caught fire. Hiraga
jumped forward, stamped out the flame and pulled him
up. One look at Fujiko was enough. The bomb
had cut her in half. Already she was hairless and
turning to cinder.
  Half blinded by the smoke, Hiraga dragged
Tyrer out onto the path. At that second the
blazing roof collapsed sending them reeling away
to fall in a heap, the resulting gusher of sparks
and embers turned into a flamethrower by the wind,
blowtorching other houses, fences, and the
next Teahouse. Shouts and screams and fire
warnings, already lines of people were dashing this way and that with
water buckets or fetching buckets, most now
wearing dampened face masks against smoke
inhalation that were always ready in abundance.
  Astonished to be still alive, coughing and gagging,
Hiraga beat out a smoldering patch on the chest
of his kimono, his short sword still in his belt, the
long sword vanished. As far as he could tell
Tyrer was unhurt but it was impossible to be sure
for he was not truly conscious, chest heaving, gasping
and vomiting from inhaling the smoke. Painfully
Hiraga stood over him to collect his breath and
his reason, looking around against new dangers. The
nearby dwelling burst into flames, then the next,
cutting their escape route.
  Katsumata was right, he thought. With this wind the
Yoshiwara's doomed. And, with it the Settlement.

  On the edge of No Man's Land the patrol
of soldiers stood shock still--with everyone else in
Drunk Town who was sober--and stared over the fence
toward the Yoshiwara. Two columns of flames
and billowing smoke reached skywards amid distant
shouts and bells brought closer by the wind.
Faintly a third explosion sounded. A third
fountain of flames. Smoke began to surround
them. A few embers swirled past.
  "Christalmighty," the Sergeant said, moving out
of the lee of the godown to see better, "was that a
bomb?"
  "Doan' know, Sarge, could be a barrel of
oil exploding, but we'd better get back, that
bleeder's heading our way an--"
  The fire bomb that Takeda had planted against
the far side of the godown detonated.
Instinctively they all ducked. More smoke,
fire crackling, bellowing from nearby Drunk
Towners and cries for water buckets and
"Fire! Fire! Hurry for Christ's sake--
that's the lamp-oil depot!"
  Half-naked men dashed in and out of adjoining
houses to save their valuables. Down the street
Mrs. Fortheringill's was emptying, inmates and
customers raving and swearing, climbing into their
clothes. More warning bells. Looting began.
  And down at the South Gate, disciplined
samurai streamed in, racing for the Yoshiwara with
ladders and fire buckets, wet smoke masks
over their faces. A few diverted
to fight the godown fire, the remainder rushed
onwards. Flames from the blazing godown roof,
fanned by the wind, jumped the alley to attack the
next line of hovels. They caught instantly.
  From his hiding place in No Man's Land
Takeda saw the soldiers in confusion and gloated
with the success of the bombs, a large section of the
Yoshiwara already ablaze. Time to make a run for
it. Quickly he adjusted his face mask, the mask
and the dirt and his soot-blackened, filthy kimono
making him even more ominous.
  In flickering alternations of night and light,
he hurried for the well head, found the knapsack,
stuck his arms through the straps and, as quickly as he
dared, picked a precarious way through the dump.
Warning cries behind him. He thought he had been
spotted but it was only about the building as one
wall caved in with a roar, showering more sparks and
fire on scattering people and on neighboring
property. Now the abundance of flames allowed
him to see better. Elated, he began to run.
Ahead was the village and safety.
  "Hey you!"
  He did not understand the words but the shout jerked him
to a stop. In front was another group of
British soldiers with an officer who had come
running from the village area to probe the danger and
had stopped, startled. They blocked his escape.
  "Must be a looter! Or arsonist! Hey you!"
  "My God, watch out, sir, it's a
samurai an' he's armed!"
  "Cover me, Sergeant! You! You there,
samurai, what're you doing? What's that you're
carrying?"
  In panic Takeda saw the officer
unbuttoning his holster, start towards him,
soldiers unslinging their rifles and all the time the
sound of the holocaust, flames chasing weird
shadows. He whirled and ran. At once they
gave chase.
  On the other side of No Man's Land the
godown blaze was totally out of control, soldiers
impotently striving to organize a fire-fighting
party to protect abutting dwellings and streets.
The fire gave enough light to help Takeda dart
through the dump, avoiding most obstacles, the
knapsack banging against his back. His breath was
coming in gulps. With a sudden gush of hope he saw
safety in the empty alley beside the burning
building ahead. He raced for it,
easily outstripping the soldiers behind him.
  "Stop or I shoot!" The words were meaningless
to him but not the hostility. Onwards in his headlong
dash, no need for evading action now, any moment
safe. He had forgotten the light that helped him
aided them, etching him clearly against the flames.
  "Stop him, Sergeant! Wound him, don't
kill him!"
  "Right, sir ... Wait, God Almighty,
it's, isn't he the bugger Sir William's
after, Nakama, that bloody assassin!"
  "Damn my eyes you're right, that's him. Quick,
Sergeant, cut him down, wound him!"
  The Sergeant aimed. His target was escaping
down the alley. He squeezed the trigger.
"Got him," he shouted gleefully and charged.
"Come on, lads!"
  The bullet sent Takeda sprawling. It had
smashed through the knapsack into his upper back,
piercing a lung, to come out from his chest cleanly, not
a fatal wound if a man was lucky. But
Takeda knew none of that, only that he felt
destroyed and he lay in the dirt howling with shock
but without pain, one arm useless and dangling, the roar
of the nearby fire drowning his cries. Terror
dragged him to his knees, the heat from approaching
fire ghastly, safety only a few paces
ahead down the alley. He crawled forward. Then
through his tears he heard the shouts of soldiers
close behind him. No escape!
  His reflexes took command. Using his good hand as
a prop, he was driven to his feet andwitha mighty
shriek, he hurled himself into the flames. The
leading young soldier skidded to a stop, scrambled
back to safety, hands held up against the inferno,
the structure due to fall any moment.
  "Sod it!" the soldier said, and glared at the
flames that sizzled, consuming his prey, the stench of
burning flesh making him gag. "Another second
an' I'da had the bugger, sir, it were him all
right, the bugger wot Sir William ..."
  That was the last thing the youth ever said.
Katsumata's bombs in the knapsack
detonated violently, a piece of metal
tore out the soldier's throat, strewing the officer
and other men like ninepins, breaking a few limbs.
As if in echo, an oil drum exploded as
violently, then another and another with
cataclysmic effect. Plumes of flames and
embers shot into the air to be seized and
used ruthlessly by the gathering force of the wind, now
self-generating in ferocity because of its heat.
  The first of the village houses began to burn.
  The shoya, his family and all villagers,
already masked against smoke and prepared within moments
of the first alarm, continued to work with well-rehearsed but
stoic speed to pack away valuables into the
small, fireproofed brick shelters that were in every
garden.
  Roofs all along the main street began
to burn.

  Less than an hour since the first bomb
exploded, the Three Carp was no more, and most of the
Yoshiwara burnt out. Only brick chimney
stacks, stone house-supports, and brick, stone
and earth fireproof shelters stood in heaps of ash
and glowing embers. The odd cup or sak`e
flask, most refired now, the glaze spoiled.
Metal kitchen utensils. Gardens ruined,
shrubs scorched, groups of dazed inhabitants
huddled around. Miraculously the fires had
missed two or three Inns but around them was stark
emptiness, ash and embers, up to the charred
encircling fence and the moat beyond.
  On the other side of the moat was the village.
It was blazing. Beyond the village, in the
Settlement proper the roofs of three houses
near Drunk Town were already alight. One of these
was the Guardian where Jamie McFay had his
new office.
  Nettlesmith and their clerks were hauling
buckets for Jamie atop the ladder who used them
to douse the roof flames, the next house well
afire. Other men, Chinese servants, and
Maureen, bravely darted in and out of the front
door carrying armfuls of papers, printing dies,
and whatever was most important. Burning wooden
roof tiles cascaded around them. Billowing
smoke from Drunk Town, causing them to cough and
heave, hampered them. Above, Jamie was losing the
battle. A gust shoved flames at him. He
almost fell off the ladder, then shinnied down,
defeated. "It's hopeless," he panted, his
face black-smudged, hair singed.
  "Jamie, help me with the press, for God's
sake!" Nettlesmith called out and ran back
inside. Maureen began to follow but Jamie
stopped her. "No, stay here! Watch your
dress," he shouted above the noise, a
shower of embers from the roof surrounding her, then he
dashed inside.
  Wisely she backed off to the sea side of the
street, helping others stack what had been
salvaged more safely. The whole roof was ablaze
now and more embers showered Jamie and Nettlesmith
as they stumbled out with the small, portable press.
Then, seeing the roof was beyond saving and the building
doomed, Jamie hurried back to help him
rescue type, dyes, ink and some paper. Quickly
the wooden building became too dangerous to enter.
The two men stood outside and cursed, then
stepped further to safety as some rafters
collapsed.
  "Bloody sodding fire," Jamie said,
angrily kicking a box of typeface, then
turned, feeling Maureen take his hand.
  "I'm so sorry, love," she said, awash with
tears.
  His arms went around her and he said fervently,
meaning it, "Never mind, you're safe, that's all
that counts."
  "Jamie, dinna' worry, wait till
morning, then we can think better and properly.
Perhaps it's no' so bad."
  At that moment samurai fire fighters
trotted past. With signs Jamie asked one of
them where he could get a fire mask. The man
grunted, pulled a handful from his sleeve and rushed
off again. Jamie doused them in a bucket of
water. "Here, Maureen," he said giving her the
first one, another to Nettlesmith who sat on a
keg, on the sea side of the promenade, cursing
mutely. The roof collapsed, turning the
building into a blazing mess.
  "Terrible," Jamie said to Nettlesmith.
  "Yes. But not yet a disaster." The lean,
older man motioned along the promenade. The
north end of the Settlement was still clean of fire,
Struan's, Brock's and the Legations untouched.
"With any luck it won't burn that far."
  "This wind is killing us."
  "Yes. We're safe enough on the shore side
..."
  More fire fighters with axes hurried up,
Dmitri amongst them. He saw their wreckage.
"Jesus, sorry about that," he said on the run,
"we're going to try to cut a fire break."
  Maureen said, "Jamie, go and help. I'm
safe here."
  "Nothing more you can do here," Nettlesmith said,
"I'll watch her. We're safe here, and
we'll retreat on Struan's if necessary." He
took out a pencil and paper, licked the pencil
thoughtfully, and began to write.

  Their axes bit into the wooden shack, the
buildings southwards ablaze, the wind hotter every
minute and stronger than ever. They redoubled their
efforts, then an ember-filled gust forced them
back, then another, and they fled to safety.
Dmitri said, helplessly, "Christ, you ever seen
anything go up so fast? They're all
tinderboxes, death traps. What now?"
  "What about up there?" Jamie shouted. He
pointed nearer to the fence. They all joined his rush.
But the closer they got to the fence and the Yoshiwara,
the worse the smoke and heat and fires became.
  There was so little he or anyone could do. Nothing,
in fact. The fires were spreading too fast, people
running this way and that with buckets but the moment one
blaze was extinguished, ten others began nearby.
Behind groups of dazed women and servants seeking
safety, some with bundles, most empty-handed, the
few remaining Teahouses flared in momentary
blazes, so many moths around a candle, one moment
alive, the next dead.
  With almost everything of the Yoshiwara vanished under the
bloodsmoked sky, men mingled with the survivors
anxiously seeking their particular girl or
mama-san and Jamie joined them, his eyes going
from face to face seeking Nemi. He had not
forgotten her. If anyone could escape, she would,
he had thought. Suddenly he was not so sure. There
were so few survivors here. Worriedly,
Jamie sought a face he knew. None.
"Gomen nasai, Nemi-san, wakarimasu
ka?" he said, asking if they had seen her but
everyone said dully, or with degrees of bows and
forced smiles, "Iy`e, gomen nasai"--
No, so sorry.
  Dmitri reeled out of the smoke, coughing and
gasping. "Samurai are damn good fire
fighters, we could learn a thing or two, not that they
can stop this shit. Have you seen Nemi?"
  "No, I was just going to ask you."
  "Maybe she's the other side, or over there,"
Dmitri croaked, his chest heaving for air,
pointing towards the meadow that led to the racecourse,
a few oil lamps there lighting the
darkness. "Some of them are collecting there--some the
other side. Listen, I'm going to work my way
around, through the north gate and across the canal. You
try the meadow. If I see her, what you want
me say?"
  "Just that I hope she's safe and I'll find
her tomorrow."
  They both ducked as fire jumped over them
to fall on a village hut behind. In the confusion
Jamie lost Dmitri and continued his search,
helping where he could. Once Heavenly Skye
rushed past, calling out, "Jamie, just heard
Phillip's lost with the rest of the Three Carp."
  "God Almighty are you sure? What about
..."
  But Skye had vanished into the darkness.

  The Legations that lay northwards were not yet
directly menaced. Nor Struan's,
Brock's, or nearby houses and godowns though
the wind was strong and hotter by the minute. The
promenade and streets were crowded, everyone
preparing for a last stand, more soldiers and sailors
coming ashore from the fleet that had first sounded the
general alarm. Samurai poured into High
Street from their barracks outside the gates with
ladders and buckets, fire-masked, and
efficient. In groups they trotted along heading
for danger points.
  Sir William, a greatcoat over his
pajamas, had taken charge of the Legation
defense. Down by the surf Pallidar was
supervising dragoons connecting pumps to the sea
through long canvas hoses. He looked back
to see the General hurry out of the night, an
engineer officer alongside, a detachment of
soldiers with him, to stop in front of Sir
William.
  "I'm heading for Drunk Town and the
village," the General said, out of breath.
"Plan to blow up some houses to make a fire
break--with your permission. All right?"
  "Yes, do what you can, it might work. If the
wind doesn't drop we're finished, hurry!"
  "Happened to be watching from the bluff, looked
like three of four fires started in the Yoshiwara,
same time, different areas."
  "Good God, you mean arson?"
  "Don't know, but whether it was an Act of
God or the Devil or a bloody
arsonist, this'll burn us out!" With the engineers
he raced into the night.
  Sir William saw the Admiral trudging
up the beach from the Legation wharf where more sailors and
marines were landing. "Boats are ready
to evacuate," Ketterer said. "We've stores
enough for the whole population. We can assemble them
along the beach, should be safe enough."
  "Good. This could be dicey."
  "Yes. Completely changes our plans,
what?"
  "'fraid so. Couldn't have happened at a
worse time." God-cursed fire, Sir
William thought angrily. Complicates everything
--the Yoshi meeting tomorrow and bombardment of
Kagoshima, and just when Ketterer had finally
agreed to obey instructions. What the devil do
we do, evacuate or what? Put everyone
aboard the fleet and sail back to Hong Kong with
our tails between our legs, or move everyone
to Kanagawa and to hell with what the Japanese
might do? Can't. Kanagawa's a worse
trap, bay's too shallow for the fleet to be
useful.
  He glanced at Ketterer. The Admiral's
face was hard and weatherbeaten, the small eyes
fixed in the distance. He'll plump for Hong
Kong, he thought sickened. Damn this wind!
  Down the street MacStruan had ladders against
the side of his building. Servants and clerks
handed up buckets of water to others perched there
dousing the shingles. Next door at Brock's,
Gornt and others were doing the same.
  "Christ, look!" someone shouted. Now fires
blanketed the whole of the village and Drunk
Town skyline. The wind was blistering hot and
furious in their faces, rushing at them, taunting
them.
  "Mon Dieu," Angelique murmured.
She wore a heavy coat over her nightdress,
head scarf and had dressed hastily at the first
warning and fled outside. It was evident the fires
would reach them soon, so she scurried back
indoors, up to her room. Rapidly she stuffed
her brushes and combs and salves and creams and
rouge into a bag, her best lingerie next. A
moment of thought, and then no longer frightened, she
opened the window, shouted at Ah Soh below to stay
there and began throwing dresses and coats to her.
  Ah Soh sniffled and did not
move. MacStruan, close by, cursed her
into motion and pointed across the road to their jetty where
clerks already guarded boxes of papers, stores and
rifles, Vargas and others sweating more parcels
into place, MacStruan having decided to chance
leaving their specie, bullion and certain
documents in their iron safe.
  "You motherless whore, Ah Soh," he shouted in
perfect Cantonese, "take tai-tai's things
over there, guard them and stay there even if the
fires of hell fall on you or I'll beat the
soles of your feet to pulp!" She obeyed
instantly. "Angelique," he called out with a
laugh, "we'll get plenty of warning, stay in the
warm until I call for you!"
  "Thanks, Albert." She saw Gornt
looking up at her from next door. He waved.
She waved back. Now there was no fear in her.
Albert would warn her in good time, safety lay
across the road or in boats collecting on and
near the shore. Her mind was clean of worry.
Earlier she had decided how to handle Andr`e and
Skye and the Woman in Hong Kong. And Gornt
tomorrow, and what to do.
  Humming Mozart, she took out her brush and
sat in front of her mirror to make herself much more
presentable for all of them. It was like old times.
Now, what shall I wear, what would be best?

  Raiko followed the burly servant amidst the
remains of her Inn. He carried an oil lamp
and led the way carefully, using stepping stones where
he could, skirting bad patches of embers that
glowed overbrightly, a warning in the dark, fanned
by the hot, acrid air. Her face was blackened,
hair heavy with ash and dust, her kimono scorched
and in tatters. Both wore smoke masks, yet
they coughed and wheezed from time to time. "Go more to the
left," she croaked, throat dry, continuing her
inspection, only stubs of stone supports, in
neat square patterns above ashes, indicating where
dwellings had been.
  "Yes Mistress." They plodded onwards.
  Above the noise of the wind they could vaguely
hear others calling, an occasional cry of pain and
weeping, distant fire bells from the village and
Settlement that were burning furiously. She was
over her initial panic. Fires happen. They
were the work of the gods. Never mind, I'm alive.
Tomorrow I will find out what caused the
fire, if it was an explosion as some were claiming,
though in the uproar this foul wind could play tricks
with hearing, and the bang could easily have been an
ill-placed oil jar falling into the kitchen fires
and bursting where the blaze began. The Three Carp
is gone. So are all the others, or almost all.
I'm not ruined, not yet.
  A group of courtesans and maids, many
crying, appeared out of the night, a few of them
scorched. She recognized women from the Green
Dragon. None of her own girls. "Stop
crying," she ordered. "Go to the Sixteen
Orchids--everyone is collecting there. It's not
badly damaged, there'll be beds for all, food
and drink. Help those who are hurt. Where's
Chio-san?" This was their mama-san.
  "We haven't seen her," said one through her
tears, "I was with a client, it was all I could do
to hurry out with him to the underground shelter."
  "Good, run along, go that way and be careful,"
Raiko said, satisfied, pleased with herself,
remembering that when the Yoshiwara was being built, just
over two years ago, and mama-sans had been
selected by their Guild--with prior, expensive
approval of that department of Bakufu--she had
suggested that each Teahouse have a fireproof
cellar built near the central structure, and for
further prudence to put their brick fire-safes
below ground level. Not all of the mama-sans
approved, saying the added expense was not merited.
Never mind, it's their loss. Let's see how
many wail and beat their breasts tomorrow that they didn't
follow my example.
  She had just finished inspecting hers. Steps led
down to the iron-sheathed door. The interior was
unblemished. All valuables were safe, all
contracts, indentures, debt papers, loans
made to the Gyokoyama and bank statements,
IOU'S, best linens and dress kimonos--both
hers and the Ladies' as good as new in their
wrappers. From the beginning it had been her policy
that all expensive linens and clothes that were not to be
worn and used that evening, had to be put away
underground, almost always to groans at the extra work.
There won't be groans this dawn, she thought.
  To her immense relief all her ladies,
staff and clients were accounted for, except
Fujiko, Hinodeh, Teko, Furansu-san
and Taira, two servants, two maids still
missing. But that did not worry her.
They were surely safe elsewhere. A servant had
seen a gai-jin, perhaps two running safely
towards the Gate.
  Namu Amida Butsu, she prayed,
let them all be safe, and bless me for my
wisdom making sure that my people were well rehearsed
with fire drills.
  The horror of Yedo's Yoshiwara
conflagration, twelve years before, had taught her
the lesson. That fire had almost killed her and her
client, a rich rice merchant in the
Gyokoyama. She had saved him by waking him from
his drunken stupor, staying to drag him out at the
risk of her own life. Escaping through the gardens
they had suddenly found themselves surrounded by fire and
trapped, but they had rescued themselves from death
by furiously digging a trench in the soft earth with her
obi dagger, allowing the fire to pass over them.
Even so, much of her lower back and legs had been
badly burned, ending her career as a courtesan.
  But her client had remembered her and when she
had recovered enough to walk, he talked to the
Gyokoyama who lent her the funds to open her
own Teahouse and then he had gone on to another
lady. Their investment had been repaid fivefold.
In that fire over a hundred courtesans,
sixteen mama-sans, countless clients and maids
had perished. More had died in Ky@oto's
Shimibara fire. Over the centuries hundreds
in other fires. In the Great Fire of the
Trailing Sleeves, a few years after the
mama-san Gyoko had built the first
Yoshiwara, fire erupted and obliterated it, and
cost Yedo a hundred thousand lives. Within two
years it was rebuilt and thriving, to burn again and be
rebuilt again, endlessly. And now as before, Raiko
swore, we will rebuild ours better than ever!
  "The Sixteen Orchids would be that way,
Mistress, neh?" The servant hesitated,
unsure in the billowing smoke clouds. Around them
nothing but embers and ashes, a few pathetic house
supports, no outlines of meandering paths or
stones to guide them. Then a gust broomed away
ash and cinders to reveal cornerstones and a stone
dragon cracked by the heat. She recognized it
and knew where they were. Hinodeh's bungalow.
  "We must go back a little," she said, then something
caught her eye. A glint. "Wait. What's
that?"
  "Where, Mistress?"
  She waited. Again the wind fanned embers and
again the glitter, slightly ahead and to the right.
"There!"
  "Ah, yes." Taking care, he used a
blackened, leafless branch to brush a path,
stepped forward and raised the lamp and peered ahead.
Another cautious step, to retreat hastily as a
gust shoved embers at him.
  "Come back, we'll look tomorrow!"
  "A moment, Mistress." Flinching against the
heat, he used the branch swiftly to brush away
more ashes. He gasped. The two charred shapes
lay side by side, the left hand of one in the right
hand of the other. What glinted was a gold signet
ring, twisted and partially melted. "Mistress!"
  Aghast, like a statue, Raiko stood beside him.
Furansu-san and Hinodeh, must be, she thought
instantly, he always wore a signet ring--
remember, he even offered it to me a few days
ago.
  And, as instantly, her spirit was uplifted with the
sight of the clasped hands, the picture they made
on their bed of living coals, seeming to her to be a
cradle of precious gems, rubies, glinting and
living and dying and being reborn by the air currents
--as the two of them would be until the end of time.
  Oh so sad, she thought, tears brimming, so
sad and yet so beautiful. How peaceful they are,
lying there, how blessed, dying together, hand in hand. They
must have decided on the poison cup and to go as one.
How wise. How wise for both of them.
  She brushed at her tears, murmured,
"Namu Amida Butsu," as a
benediction. "We'll leave them in peace and
I'll decide what to do tomorrow." She backed
away, her tears bittersweet, but gladdened by the
beauty she had seen. Once more they picked their
way towards the gathering point.
  A random thought took hold of her.
  If those two were Furansu-san and Hinodeh,
the gai-jin who escaped must be Taira. That's
good, much better than the other way around. I
lose a fine source of intelligence but gain more in
the long run. Taira and Fujiko are more
docile and have a future. Skillfully handled,
Taira will easily become as informative, soon
I'll be able to talk directly with him, his
Japanese is improving daily and already good for a
gai-jin. I must arrange extra lessons and
teach him political phrases, not just
the language of bedding and the Floating World that is
all Fujiko is capable of--andwitha peasant
accent at that. Certainly my investment with him long
term is much more promising and--
  Both mistress and servant stopped at the
same moment. They stared at each other, then
abruptly at the southern sky. The wind had
dropped.

                 

    Wednesday, 14th January:
  "Yokohama's finished, William," the
General said in the first light of dawn, his voice
raw. They were on the bluff, overlooking the
Settlement, Pallidar in attendance, all of
them mounted. Smoke still wafted up to them. The
General's face was bruised and filthy, uniform
torn, cap ripped and the brim burnt. "Thought it
best to ask you to come up here, gives you a better
picture, sorry. Act of God."
  "I knew it was bad, but this ..." The words
trailed off. Sir William was numbed. None
of them had slept. The signs of fatigue and
worry were in all their faces, their clothes
scorched and dirty, Pallidar's ripped and the
worst of all. As the sun rose slightly they
could see the whole panorama to Hodogaya on the
Tokaid@o.
  The Yoshiwara no longer existed, nor the
village, most of Drunk Town, over half the
Settlement including stables. No confirmed
reports of casualties yet, but a richness of
rumors, all bad. No confirmed reason for the
catastrophe yet. Many shouted arson
by Japanese, but which Japanese and at whose
orders, no one knew, though destruction of the
Yoshiwara and village would concern none of them
to gain their ends.
  "You'll order evacuation this morning?"
  Sir William's head ached with a thousand questions
and forebodings. "First an inspection. Thank you,
Thomas. Pallidar, you come with me." He
spurred his pony down the incline. At the
Legation he reined in a moment. "Anything new,
Bertram?"
  "No sir, no confirmed names or numbers
yet."
  "Send for the village Elder, the shoya, at
once, ask him to find out how many
casualties he has and to see me at once."
  "I don't speak Japanese, Sir
William, and Phillip Tyrer isn't here."
  "Then bloody find him," Sir William
bellowed, glad for the opportunity to rid himself of
some of his pent-up anxiety, concern over Tyrer,
and was rewarded to see the effete youth pale. "And
bloody learn Japanese or I'll pack you
off to Africa and you can burden them! Get all
senior traders here in an hour ... No, not
here, the Club's better, and let's see, it's
six-twenty now, make it at nine-thirty, and for
Christ's sake pull your finger out and start using
your bloody head!" Idiot, he thought and
trotted off feeling better.
  Under the lightening sky, the people of Yokohama were
picking up the pieces of their places and their
lives. At first Sir William, escorted
by Pallidar, stayed on the High Street,
greeting everyone, answering questions by saying, "First
let me have a look. I've called a meeting
at the Club for nine-thirty, by then I'll know
better."
  Nearer Drunk Town the stench of burned
buildings worsened. This morning when the wind had
dropped, about 2:00 A.m., the fires had
died rapidly and no longer jumped fire breaks
or from house to house. Only this had saved the
Settlement from oblivion. All Legations were
safe, as well as the Harbor Master's, the main
traders and their godowns--Struan's,
Brock's, Cooper-Tillman and others.
Lunkchurch's was gutted.
  The fire had stopped exactly before Holy
Trinity leaving it untouched and he thanked God
for a most suitable miracle. Further down the
street the Catholic church had lost most windows
and roof, the maw of charred and smoking beams now like
an open mouth of rotten teeth. "'morning, where's
Father Leo?" he asked a man working in the garden,
cleaning up.
  "In the vestry, Sir William. Top of the
morning to Yourself and that Yourself is safe, Sir
William, sir."
  "Thank you. Sorry about your church. I've
called a meeting in the Club at nine-thirty,
spread the word, would you? Father Leo's welcome,
of course." He went on again.
  Unlike the village and Yoshiwara where
piles of clean ash were in drifts, like
snow, the ravaged areas of the Settlement and
Drunk Town were a mess of bricks,
flagstones, twisted metal, the remains of
machinery, engines, tools, guns, cannon,
anvils and other manufactured objects, now
junk. The festering sore of No Man's Land
had been cleaned, except for metal, and that
pleased him.
  He meandered down to the South Gate. The guard
house had disappeared. A temporary barrier had
been erected in emptiness and samurai were on
sentry duty. "Stupid clods," Pallidar
said. "They're barricading against what?"
  Sir William did not answer, too
wrapped up in what he could see and what he could
do. Ahead at the canal and moat he could see
villagers and others wandering around, or squatting in
dismal groups. The other side of the moat where the
Yoshiwara had been, clusters of women and cooks
and menservants sat or stood around the only
partial structure still standing, canvas screens up
as shelter. Samurai still doused fires here and
there. A lot of crying and sobbing on the gentle
wind.
  "Terrible, sir," Pallidar said.
  "Yes." Sir William sighed and again made
an effort--it was up to him to give the example and
by God he was going to act like Her Britannic
Majesty's Minister for Japan should act.
"Yes it is but look there, by God!" On the
bluff the tented camp was undamaged. "All our
soldiers are safe, cannon safe, artillery
safe, all armaments and the munition depot as ever
was. And look there!"
  In the bay the fleet was unscathed, Union
Jacks and ensigns flying proudly and with dawn
passing into day, every available cutter plied back
and forth bringing men ashore or taking them aboard for
food, drink, and sleep. "All the rest is
replaceable, by Harry, except people. Get some
soldiers, start counting heads and mounts. I need
to know who we've lost by the nine-thirty meeting.
Off you go!"
  "Yes sir. Most of the stables were opened and the
horses bolted for the racecourse or bluff. I
saw Zergeyev's stallion there with a couple of
grooms." Suddenly Pallidar beamed, no
longer as shattered. "You're right, Sir
William, my God how right. So long as the
Army and Navy are safe, we're
all all right, everything's all right. Thanks."
He galloped off.
  Sir William turned his attention inland.
What to do, what to do? His pony jingled her
bridles nervously and pawed the ground, sensing his
disquiet.
  "Morning, Sir William." Grey with
fatigue, Jamie McFay was approaching from
behind the remains of a building that now was a heap of
twisted metal frames, the remains of bedsteads,
furniture and charred wood. His clothes were
tattered, burnt in places, hair matted.
"How many lost? What's the latest?"
  "Nothing for certain yet. Good God, is that
... is that all that's left of the Guardian
building and the presses?"
  "'fraid so. But here." Jamie held the
bridle and handed him a badly printed sheet with a
smudged banner headline that screamed:
YOKOHAMA TORCHED. ARSON SUSPECTED.
STRUAN'S AND BROCK'S UNTOUCHED,
ARMY, NAVY AND ALL SHIPPING
SAFE. FATALITIES EXPECTED TO BE
HEAVY IN THE YOSHIWARA AND
VILLAGE. Then a brief editorial, with a
promise that an afternoon edition would be out and
apologies for the bad printing.
  "Nettlesmith's over there." Under a rough
lean-to they could see Nettlesmith, unkempt
and filthy, laboriously working the press by hand, his
printer clerks sorting type into trays still
salvaging what they could from the ashes.
  "I heard you pulled a number of villagers
out of a building, saved their lives, Jamie."
  It was still hard for Jamie to think straight.
Vaguely he recalled never finding Nemi, or
news of her, but not about the others. "I don't
remember much about it, it was chaos everywhere--others
were doing the same, or helping folk to the
hospital ..." His head was swimming with
fatigue. "Last night I heard Phillip was
lost. Is it true?"
  "Don't know. Hope to God not, though I
heard the rumor too." Sir William
exhaled loudly. "I heard the same and there are
lots of rumors but I've learned not to trust
rumor. Zergeyev was reported dead in the
Yoshiwara, so was Andr`e, but I saw him a
short time ago, Zergeyev. So, as I said,
best to wait." He indicated the tear
sheet. "Can I keep this, Jamie? Thanks.
I've convened a meeting at nine-thirty,
to discuss what we should do, your opinion would be
valuable."
  "Not much to discuss, is there. I'm wiped out."
  "There's lots to discuss, Jamie. We're
really very lucky. The Army and Navy ..."
Sir William glanced off, and raised his hat.
"'morning Miss Maureen." She was still in the
same clothes but clean and fresh and wore a
bonnie smile.
  "'morning Sir William, glad to see
you're safe and that the Legation's safe. 'morning,
love." Her smile became even more special.
She put her arm through Jamie's, careful not to be
forward and kiss him however much she wanted to--he
looked so handsome in his charred clothes, his face
unshaven and etched with worry, nothing that hot soup
and hot whisky and a good sleep would not cure.
  On the way here to find him, many had told her
how brave he had been during the night. Most of
her night had been spent calming Mrs.
Lunkchurch and Mrs. Swann, their spouses and
others at the Struan outpost, doling out the demon
drink as her mother called all liquor--though not in
her father's presence--attending to burns or taking
them to Hoag or Babcott who had set up
field hospitals as near to the worst areas as
possible. "You look fine, Jamie, just tired
out."
  "No more than others."
  Knowing he had been forgotten--and not a little
envious--Sir William saluted with his quirt.
"See you later, Jamie. Miss Maureen."
  They watched him canter away. Her arm and
nearness felt good to Jamie. All at once his
unhappiness and apprehension for the future surged
and he turned and hugged her with the full measure of
his misery. She melted against him, so happy, and
waited, and gave him of her strength.
  In time he felt his wits revive, his
courage returning and his sense of belonging easing
back. "Bless you, I can't believe it but you've
made me come alive again, bless you." Then he
remembered Tess and the five thousand Maureen had
wheedled out of her, and Maureen saying, Tomorrow things
will no' be so bad, and his joy exploded.
"By God, Sparkles," he said, hugging her again,
"you're right. We're alive and lucky and
everything's going to be fine and it's all
due to you!"
  "Now dinna exaggerate, laddie," she said with a
little smile, head against his, not letting go of him
yet. "Nothing to do with me." It's to do with God,
she was thinking, that's His special gift to us women
as His gift to men is to do the same for women at
special times. "It's just life." She used
"life" but she could have said, "love" but did
not though totally sure that's what it truly was.
  "I'm proud of you, lassie. You were grand last
night."
  "Och aye, but I did na do a thing at all.
Come along, it's time to nap."
  "No time to nap, I've got to see the
shoya."
  "A nap before the meeting, I'll wake you with a
cup of tea. You can use my bed, Albert says
it's our room for as long as we want and I'll
throw everyone else out."
  Smiling through his exhaustion, he said, "What
are you going to do?"
  She hugged him. "I'll hold your hand and
tell you a bedtime story. Come along."


  Tyrer opened his eyes and found himself in hell,
every bone aching, every breath abrading his chest, eyes
burning and skin tormented. In the acrid, smoky
black he could see disembodied Japanese
faces peering at him, two of them, their mouths
twisted with cruel smiles and any moment they would
pull up their pitchforks and begin to torture him
again. A face moved closer. He backed, and
let out a cry of pain. Through the mist he heard
Japanese and then in English, "Taira-sama,
wake, you safe!"
  The fog enveloping his mind dissipated.
"Nakama?"
  "Yes. You safe."
  Now he perceived the light was from an oil lamp,
they seemed to be in a cave and Nakama was
smiling at him. So was the other face. Saito!
Nakama's cousin, the one interested in ships ...
No, this isn't Nakama, this is Hiraga the
assassin!
  He jerked up and fell back against the wall
of the tunnel, his headache blinding him for a moment,
and coughed and coughed, bile and a foul taste of
smoke making him heave. When there was no more to come
up and the spasm had passed, he felt
a cup pressed to his lips. He drank the
icy water eagerly, choking a little. "Sorry,"
he murmured. Again Hiraga wrapped the
blanket around his half-burnt sleeping
kimono. "Thanks."
  In a minute he had caught his breath, mind
slowly moving from blank to a kaleidoscope of
images, coalescing into more pictures, blazing
walls, Hiraga grabbing him out of a blaze and
running, falling and being helped up, Teahouses
collapsing around him, shrubs exploding in their
faces, can't breathe, gagging, can't breathe,
Hiraga shouting, "Quick, this way ... no, this
way, no back, this way ..." something missing but
picking himself up again, fleeing this way and that,
guided through walls of fire in front and behind and
to the side, women screaming, smoke, and then at the
well head, the fire reaching for them, almost at them,
"Down, down there, hurry," ducking into it, fire
searing, a light below, an orb in the darkness,
Saito's face, and then like a thunderbolt ...
  Fujiko!
  "Where's Fujiko?"' he had screamed.
  Gasping for breath, Hiraga shouted above the
roaring flames, "Quick, go down, she dead in
room, Fujiko dead when find you ... quick or you
dead!"
  He remembered that part clearly now. He had
leapt out of the well and began to rush back, the
fire worse than before, certain death ahead but he
had to reach her to make sure and then he was flat
on his face, a blinding pain in his neck, he
tried to scramble up, the heat monstrous, and all
he remembered seeing was the edge of a rock-hard
hand driving for the side of his neck. "You ... I
was going for her but you stopped me?"
  "Yes. No way save. Fujiko dead, so
sorry, I saw. She dead, you too if go
back so hit and carry here. Fujiko dead in
room." Hiraga said it flat, still disgusted with
Tyrer for risking both their lives on such a
stupidity. He had only just had time to lift
Tyrer onto his shoulder and clamber down, almost
losing his footing to reach safety, saving his own
life by a paper thickness from the flames. And he
was thinking, fuming, even the most baka man must have
known there no chance to find her, no way to survive
with the whole garden, entire Teahouses afire, and
even if she hadn't been dead then, she was dead
fifteen times now. "If no hit, you
dead. Is dead better?"
  "No." Tyrer's grief swamped him.
"Sorry. I owe you my life again." He wiped
his face to try, unsuccessfully, to stop the
anguish. Fujiko dead, oh God oh God.
"Sorry, Nak--sorry Hiraga-sama, where
are we?"
  "Tunn'er. Near Three Carp. It go
to vi'rrage, under fence, moat." Hiraga
motioned up the well. "It day now."
  Tyrer clambered painfully to his feet.
Once upright he felt a little better. Daylight
at the well head was muted by billowing smoke, but
he could see that it was about dawn.
  "Dozo." With a smile Akimoto handed him
a loincloth and a spare kimono.
  "Domo," Tyrer said, shocked by the amount his
own had been burned. There were some burn patches
on his legs, nothing truly bad. Hiraga was
climbing the rickety handholds to peer out, to be
driven back by the heat.
  Once more in the tunnel, Hiraga said, "No
good. Too hot. Here." He offered him the water
again and it was accepted gratefully.
"Taira-sama, best go that way." He pointed
down the tunnel. "You a'we right?"
  "Yes. Fujiko, she was dead? You're quite
sure."
  "Yes."
  "What happened? I was asleep and then ... was
it a bomb? I can remember ... I think I was
blown the other side of the room from ... from
Fujiko. It felt as if a bomb went off below
the house. Was it and why the fire, everything on
fire?"
  Akimoto touched Tyrer with a smile and said in
Japanese, "Taira-sama, you were lucky.
If it wasn't for Hiraga you'd be dead. Do you
understand?"
  "Hai, wakarimasen." Tyrer bowed
solemnly to Hiraga, adding in Japanese,
"Thank you, Hiraga-sama, again in debt.
Thank you for life." Sickness went through him.
"Sorry, first rest little." Awkwardly he sat
down. "What happen?"
  "We speak Ing'erish. Why fires? Bad
man have fire bomb. Set fire here, wind
take fire to Yokohama and th--"
  Tyrer was shocked into life. "The
Settlement's gone too?"
  "Don't know, Taira-sama. No time to
'rook but Yoshiwara gone, think vi'rrage
too. Maybe Yokohama too."
  Tyrer scrambled to his feet and went for the
well.
  "No, not up, this way." Hiraga lit
another lamp. "You fo'rrow, yes?" In
Japanese he said to Akimoto, "You stay here,
I'll take him part of the way, I want to see
what's happened, then I'll come back." Leading
the way down the tunnel he said again in English,
"Bad man have fire bomb. Want hurt
gai-jin. South wind make 'ritter fire big
fire."
  At once Tyrer understood the significance
of the south wind pattern: "My God, everything's
so combustible, it'll blaze like nothing on earth.
My God, if ..." He stopped, frantic with
worry. Water was running down the tunnel
wall. He scooped some up to cool his head. The
cold helped. "Sorry, go on, a bad man?
What bad man?"
  "Bad man," Hiraga repeated darkly, but
disoriented, of two minds: he was both filled with
fury that Takeda had taken the initiative and
demolished his own safe haven, and at the same
time delighted with the success of the fire bombs that
he had seen. With the south wind and the Yoshiwara
fired, the village had to go and the gai-jin's
houses too. And with their Yokohama base gone
gai-jin would have to leave as Ori, first, and then
Katsumata had predicted. Sonno-joi had
been advanced.
  An hour or so ago he had tried to peer out
of the Drunk Town well head to see for himself but the
heat was too much and had driven him back. Perhaps
the bricks had cooled enough for him to see the extent
of the devastation there. He held in his hope.
Tyrer still had to be dealt with.
  The success of his story depended on whether or
not Takeda had been caught alive. It was a good
gamble that Takeda had not been and then his version,
mostly true, would be logical: "Bad man
want destroy all gai-jin, drive away from
Nippon. Man from Bakufu. Bakufu want
all gai-jin away, Yoshi want all gai-jin
gone. Pay spy to start fire, blame shishi, but
man from Bakufu."
  "You know this man?"
  Hiraga shook his head. "A
Satsuma man, mama-san say me."
  "Raiko-san?"
  "No, Wakiko, another Teahouse."
Hiraga said, inventing a name. They had reached the
water. "Best take off c'rothes. Safe."
They stripped and, with the oil lamp held up, forded
the barrier. And on the other side while Tyrer
painfully re-tied the loincloth and put on the
kimono, Hiraga elaborated on the theme that the
Bakufu were evil, they would cast the blame
elsewhere, on ronin, the shishi but they had planned
and precipitated it, Anjo, the Elders and
especially Yoshi.
  To Tyrer it was very plausible. V. Again a
Satsuma, one of Sanjiro's devils.
  At the lip of the well, Hiraga pointed
upwards. "Same as other. First I see." He
handed Tyrer the lamp and climbed to the top, the
bricks still hot. Warily he peered out. What
he saw made his head reel. Where once No
Man's Land was hemmed in, now he could see
clear to the sea, past the space that was once
Drunk Town, past the other space that was once
the village, right up to the north end. Many
gai-jin buildings there were untouched but that did not
worry him. All in all Yokohama had ceased
to be. He returned below.
  "What's happened, Hiraga-sama?"
  "You go see. I stay. You go now, friend.
Hiraga not go, cannot--samurai still search,
neh?"
  Tyrer saw the brown eyes watching him, this
strange alien who had certainly risked his life
to save him. And had saved him for the second time.
What more can a friend do than risk his life for his
friend? "Without you, I know I'd be dead. I owe you
a life. To thank you is not enough."
  Hiraga shrugged, silently.
  "What will you do?"
  "P'rease?"
  "If I want to see you, to contact you."
  "I here. Taira-sama, not forget Yoshi
price my head, neh? P'rease, not say about
tunn'er. Bakufu and Yoshi want me bad.
If Taira-sama say, soon dead, can no where
to run."
  "I won't tell anyone. How can I get you
a message?"
  Hiraga thought about that. "Sun set time, come
here, speak down. I here sun set
time. Understand?"
  "Yes." Tyrer stuck out his hand. "Don't be
afraid, I won't tell and I'll try
to help." Hiraga's grip was as firm.

  "Phillip! Phillip, my boy, thank
God you're safe!" Sir William's face
was alight with relief and he hurried towards him
to grip him on both shoulders. "The rumor said
you'd been swallowed up in the Yoshiwara, come and
sit down, you poor chap." He helped him to the
best chair in his office by the fire. "Good God,
you look terrible, what on earth happened, you need
a drink! Brandy coming up!"
  Tyrer relaxed into the tall chair feeling much
better. After the initial horror of the damage and
meeting a few people on the waterfront, seeing
bandages and burns, no one spoke of deaths,
seeing the Legations, Struan's and Brock's and
important parts untouched--along with the army
encampment and the fleet--all this took away most
of his tension. No one seemed to know who was lost,
or how many, so he had hurried here. He took
a large swallow of the drink. "I was caught in the
Yoshiwara all right. I was with, er, with my girl
and, well, she died." His unhappiness rushed in
again like a tidal wave.
  "My God, sorry about that. Strange, your
other friend, Nakama, Hiraga whatever his real
name is, he's dead too."
  "Sir?"
  "Yes," Sir William said and sat in the
chair opposite and ran on happily,
"definite identification. A patrol spotted
him in No Man's Land at the beginning of the fire
in Drunk Town, at first they thought he was a
looter and gave chase but recognized him, shot
the bugger, wounding him, to stop him, but can you
imagine, the madman got up and hurled himself
into a blazing building--the old oil depot. A
few moments later the Sergeant said there was a
terrific explosion and the place seemed to blow
up."
  "That's not possible be--"
  "I agree it's unlikely, throwing yourself
into an inferno, ridiculous, no one would do that.
Sorry to say two of the lads were killed trying
to catch him--caught by the explosions. Damned
shame! Nakama certainly could have been the
arsonist, if there was one, rather farfetched
if you ask me. In any event, oil barrels were
exploding all over." He saw Tyrer's
agitation and pallor and felt badly for him.
"Sorry for you, Phillip, sorry that he's
dead because I know you liked him, but not sorry
otherwise--he was an assassin and it gets us out
of a dreadful hole with Yoshi, doesn't it?"
He waited expectantly for him to agree but there
was only a hollow face in front of him.
"Sorry, must be a shock on top of the, the other
--it must have been awful?"
  Tyrer was unbalanced, difficult
to assimilate Hiraga's mistaken death. "The
Yoshiwara, yes, yes it was," and just as he was
about to correct Sir William he was overridden
again.
  "Have to tell you, Phillip, we've been
incredibly lucky. Army's intact, Navy,
only one of our community so far though we're still
checking. Did you see any of our chaps last
night in the Yoshiwara?"
  "No sir, not one of ours, no." Tyrer could
not get his mind working properly. "Not a soul. You
see I w--"
  "Damn! Difficult trying to track everyone
down, can't get an accurate count. Drunk
Town's hopeless, but even there they say only
half a dozen vagrants, no one with any name but
Charlie or Tom or George. Glad to say
Mrs. Fortheringill's young ladies are all
safe. Astounding we all escaped, if the wind
hadn't dropped ... but then it did and thank
God for that ... did you see Holy Titties
escaped too? Of course damages will run
into hundreds of thousands of pounds. Thank God for
insurance, what? Well, drink up and take a
nap. When you think about it, you'll see how
fortunate we were with Nakama, he was developing
into a major diplomatic disaster. I'm off, just
going to discuss a plan with the community. Why don't
you lie down until I'm back an--"
  A knock. Bertram said, "The shoya's here,
Sir William."
  "Perfect timing, show him in. Phillip,
before you go you can translate for me. Come in come
in, Mr. Shoya."
  The shoya bowed deferentially, on guard.
  "My Master greet you, Shoya," Tyrer
translated, still dazed, his mind elsewhere,
desperate to lie down and think this all
through, "please to say how many lose in fire?"
  "Please thank him for his kindness in asking but
please do not be concerned about our problems." The
shoya found the question astonishing for it was no business
of the gai-jin. What trap are they setting for me?
he wondered.
  "My Master says want know how many lost?"
  "Oh so sorry, I am not sure of a final
count, but five fishermen and two families have
gone onwards," the shoya said politely, making
up a figure as the gai-jin leader had asked
pointedly, "how many lost," thus expecting
figures. Actually they had lost none of their people
or children or boats, having had plenty of warning.
  "My Master say, so sorry. Can he help
village?"
  "Ah! Ah yes, yes please thank the Great
Lord, the families could use some bags of rice
and a little money, any help with food or ..." The
shoya left it hanging to allow them to make up their
own minds. Is this another trap?
  "My Master says that he send foods for
village. Please say how fire start."
  The shoya was thinking how totally mad of them
to expect an answer to that. Dangerous to be
involved in politics, even worse between shishi and
Bakufu. While he greatly regretted the
loss of all the profit when the gai-jin left their
shores tomorrow or the next day, all was not lost because
all his books and receipts and bullion were
safe, and because of his agreement with the Jami
gai-jin, which had become even more important now.
I'm sure my stoku kompanii won't
suffer.
  At the same time he was pleased with shishi daring
to drive them out, blaming the vile Bakufu.
Sonno-joi. We're better off without
gai-jin here. Better they are locked up in
Nagasaki's little Deshima as in the past. I will
open a branch in Nagasaki and be ready for their
return. If ever.
  "So sorry, but probably oil in a
kitchen," he said with a humble bow. "Only the
Yoshiwara cooks at night, we do not, please
excuse me, that is all I know."
  "My Master say, this man Nakama, or
Hiraga, the shishi Lord Yoshi want, he seen
by soldiers who try catch him. He run away
and dead in fire. You know him?"
  The shoya's foreboding tripled, though
the death, to his delight, had also been reported.
"Please excuse me," he croaked, "I
only know him as client, never shishi. Dead?
How wonderful the assassin's dead.
Wonderful!"
  Sir William sighed, tired of the questions and
answers. "Thank him and dismiss him,
Phillip."
  Thankfully the old man left. Sir
William said, "Off you go, be ready to leave at
noon."
  "Sir?"
  "For Kanagawa, the Yoshi meeting. You
didn't forget?"
  Tyrer was flabbergasted. "Surely he won't
be expecting us now," he said weakly, the idea
of a lengthy meeting translating the Treaty's
nuances filling him with nausea. "Surely not!"
  "That's why we're going." Sir William
beamed. "Keep him off balance, eh? We're
British, not a bunch of lily-white twits.
We've just had a minor contretemps, a slight
hitch." He put on his coat. "See you at
noon, in best bib and tucker."
  "But he won't turn up, not after this."
  "Yes. If he doesn't then he loses
face, we don't."
  "I can't, Sir William, not as
interpreter. I'm ... I'm just exhausted and just
can't, not today, sorry."
  "'fraid you'll have to. Stiff upper lip and
all that."
  Tyrer saw the thin smile, the coldness
returning. And inflexibility. "Sorry, I
can't, Sir. I've had it. Please let
Andr`e do it, he's better than I am."
  "You have to do it," Sir William said, no
humor in him now, "Andr`e Poncin's dead."
  Tyrer almost fell. "He can't be ... how?"
  "In the Yoshiwara. I heard just before you came
in, that's why I was so relieved to see you
safe." Saying that suddenly reminded Sir
William of the sealed envelope Andr`e had left
with him in the Legation safe, to be opened in event
of his death. "Henri identified him, as much as one
could identify such a corpse. His signet ring was
still on ... Well," he said, sickened at the
thought, "poor fellow was burnt to a cinder in his
garconi@ere. I understand it's only a few
yards from yours in the same Teahouse.
I'd say you were extremely lucky,
Phillip. Be ready at noon."
  He walked out and down the street, heading for the
Club. Men were streaming from all directions.
Passing Struan's he glanced at the building,
thankful it was safe, with Brock's--a good omen,
he thought, one of them's certainly the Noble House
and Brock's is a bloody sight better with
Gornt than with Norbert. He noticed
Angelique at her window and waved. She waved
back. Poor Angelique, wonder if
Henri's told her about Andr`e. Then, hearing the
tumult from inside the Club even this far away,
the usual shouting, cursing and clinking glasses,
he sighed and put his mind to the business of the
Settlement.
  Silence fell as he entered. The Club was
crammed, an overflow on the steps outside. A
narrow path opened up for him through the packed,
sweating ranks and he walked to his usual
place near the bar to greet the other Ministers,
Seratard, Erlicher and Zergeyev who had part of
his face bandaged from burns and his arm in a sling.
Anyone of importance was present, and many who were
not, many bandaged, some with broken bones but all
faces flushed. Already a few drunks were laid
out.
  "'morning. I'm happy to report we've
been tremendously lucky--"
  Catcalls interrupted him, shouts of
"Balls, I'm ruined ... Wot're you talking
about for God's sake ... Let him talk ...
He's full of wind, hasn't he seen ...
Oh for God's sake shut up ...!"
  He waited and then continued tougher in tone:
"We really have been lucky, only Andr`e
Poncin's been confirmed dead ..." an audible
murmur of grief for his music was greatly
appreciated--"no one else of the community.
Mr. Seratard identified the body and the funeral
will be tomorrow. Unfortunately we lost two
soldiers, their funeral's tomorrow also. In Drunk
Town a few are still unaccounted for but no one we
know by name. Our Army's intact, all firearms,
shells, munitions intact, Navy's intact--
we are very lucky indeed and I propose we should
give thanks to God." In the dead silence he
added, "I'm asking the padre to hold a
special evensong at dusk, all are invited.
Any questions so far?"
  "What about our firms?" Lunkchurch said.
"I'm burnt out."
  "That's what we all have fire insurance for,
Mr. Lunkchurch." A bellow of laughter
stopped him. "What?"
  Heavenly Skye, Yokohama's forwarding
insurance agent to Hong Kong where all policies
were accepted, said, "Sorry to say, Sir
William, Barnaby's policy lapsed last
week and, to save money, he refused to renew
until the first of the month." The rest of what he
said was again drowned in laughter and jeers.
  "I'm sorry to hear that. In any event,
by tonight's packet, to the Governor of Hong Kong,
I'm formally declaring the Settlement a disaster area
for all ..." Roars of agreement and "Good
Old Willie" greeted that for such a
pronouncement made sure all claims would be
dealt with expeditiously. "... a disaster area for
all legitimate claims, all of which must be
substantiated, requiring my signature to be
valid and ..."
  Another roar, this time of fury, for he was known
to be punctilious unlike certain officials in
the Hong Kong Government, and the fire had
automatically been considered by many to be a
heaven-sent opportunity to inflate inventories.
  When there was sufficient quiet, he added
sweetly, "No exceptions will be considered and the
sooner claims are on my desk the sooner
they'll be approved, signed and dispatched ..."
A general movement for the door began and he
bellowed with a voice huge for such a thin man,
"I haven't finished, by God! Next, certain
ill-advised, foolish people believe the wisest
course is to abandon our foothold here. Her
Majesty's Government has no intention of
leaving. None-what-so-ever." Arguments to the contrary
began but he overrode them coldly. "Next, you
are required to assist each other like British
gentlemen and ..."
  "Wot about the bloody Yanks?" someone shouted
to jeers and cheers for and against.
  "Them too," he called back, his humor
returned. "A few of them are, and many more could
be." More laughter. "So act like gentlemen and
rebuild as fast as possible. That's
important. We must confirm our position here
because, last, most seriously, there are rumors the
fire was arson."
  "That's right, my musume said it were."
  "One likely report is that the arsonist was the
samurai, Nakama, the fellow wanted by the
Bakufu as a revolutionary though Mr. Tyrer
and I--and Mr. McFay I believe--I found
him pleasant, no threat and a vast source of
information."
  "That's right," Jamie said, refreshed
by Maureen's tenderness. "I don't believe he
could be an arsonist, least that's what I think."
  "Be that as it may, we know for a fact he's
dead and he was caught in suspicious
circumstances. Everyone must be on their toes in
case it was arson, personally I'm not convinced, but
if the fire was an act of violence against us there will
be others, if an Act of God, well, that's
His privilege ..."
  "Amen," many said, so thankful to be alive.
  "... so be aware of possible danger but let us
act as normal and get back to work. Thank you,
good day."
  "What about the Yoshiwara, an' Mrs.
Fortheringill's?"
  Sir William blinked. Good God, I must
be getting old, he thought, the problem of the
Yoshiwara had not occurred to him, when it was what
made Japan bearable, even desirable to most
men. "Mrs. Fortheringill's will certainly be
well covered by insurance. As to the first ...
We'll start a fund right now. For one week.
I'll open it with twenty guineas and, well, because
it's part of our disaster area, Her Majesty's
Government will match, pound for pound all
contributions."
  To more cheers and backslapping he chatted
briefly with the other Ministers, telling them, to their
surprise, the Yoshi meeting was on, that he and
Seratard would deal with Yoshi, but would they dine with
him tonight for a private meeting. On the promenade
he mopped his brow. Satisfied, he started for
home.
  "Hey, look!" someone called out behind him.
He turned, and watched in wonder, and envy, with
others leaving the Club.
  In the desolate area where the village had
been, now the whole location swarmed with industrious
men women and children, working and cleaning up with an
antlike zeal towards the same goal;
to re-create that which had disappeared. Two houses,
roofed and shoji-walled, were already
erected, others half up. Many were carrying new
lumber and shoji walls from a pile already
established outside the South Gate.
  Pity our fellows aren't as quick off the mark,
he thought, awed and saw, the other side of the moat,
across the repaired bridge, the Bridge
to Paradise, more activity, and a temporary
gateway already up, swaying in the breeze.
  From here he could read the cherished,
well-remembered Chinese characters on it--the
English translation already scrawled there too,
looking somehow quaint in calligraphy: Lust
cannot wait, it must be satisfied.

  That afternoon, the sea fair, sky uneasy, the
Struan cutter turned for her Yokohama berth,
returning from the Kanagawa-Yoshi meeting.
Sir William's pennant fluttered from the
masthead. Those in the cabin, Sir William,
Seratard, and Tyrer dozed--Tyrer like a dead
man. The Bosun tooted his whistle to ask
cutters crowding their dock to move out of the way but
there were loud shouts of "Wait your bloody
turn," with a variety of profanity as
punctuation.
  Sir William opened his eyes, called up
the Bosun, "Drop us at the Brock wharf," and
when the Bosun suggested the Mr. MacStruan
wouldn't like that at all, Sir William
bellowed, "Do what you're told!" The others
jerked out of sleep. Except Tyrer who mumbled
and drifted off again.
  Seratard stretched and stifled a yawn. "Grand
lunch, William, good fish," adding in French
without noticing it, "I would have preferred a garlic
butter and parsley sauce. Never mind, your chef
is English so what can he do?"
  "He's Chinese," Sir William said,
good-naturedly.
  The meeting had gone exactly as he had
planned. There had been none. They had arrived
on time, waited half an hour, then sent for the
local Governor, Tyrer saying they could not
understand where Lord Yoshi had got to: "Is he
sick?"'
  "Ah so sorry I don't know Lord ..."
  "My Master says, Ask after the health of
Lord Yoshi, say we here as asked. As soon as
well please make new day." Deliberately
Tyrer had dropped all real
pleasantries. The Governor had flushed, bowed
as to superiors, apologized again and hurried off
disgusted that the gai-jin were still in place--naturally
every civilized person from here to Yedo had seen the
fires and presumed the gai-jin, those left, would
be licking their burns, boarding their ships to join the
exodus and sail away.
  After the Governor and his entourage had left,
Sir William had suggested a leisurely
lunch, guiding Seratard to their substantial
cellar. "We deserve a celebration, Henri.
What would you like to drink? We were truly lucky
last night--apart from Andr`e, poor chap."
  "Yes. Pity. The will of God." Seratard
frowned, still looking at labels. "Ah!
Montrachet, '51. Two bottles?"'
  "At least two. George is joining us.
Might as well taste a Margaux--I
recommend the '48, Ch`ateau
Pichon-Longuville--and a Ch`ateau d'allyquem
with the pudding."
  "Perfect, shame we have no cheese. No
chance Yoshi will appear now?"'
  "If he does we won't see him."
  "At the Club meeting you said dinner tonight. You
want to discuss something special with the others?"'
  "Yes." The cellar was cool and pleasant.
A few glasses stood on a sideboard beside the
racks. Sir William selected a half
bottle of champagne and began to open it. "I
think we must pretend the fire is not the disaster it
really is and press ahead against Sanjiro, and his
capital Kagoshima."
  "Now?"' Seratard was very surprised. "But
surely sending the fleet when we're so exposed
is highly dangerous, isn't it? Tempting
them?"'
  "Very, but that's my point. My proposal is
that we send British warships only, keeping your
flagship and the Russian here, with the armed
merchantmen. We cancel sending army units for the
proposed landing and send only marines. Simply
make it a sea bombardment." He popped the
cork and poured. "That'll make Ketterer's
mission much easier, he never liked the idea of
commanding a seaborne landing. Now he can stand off in the
bay and pound the devil out of them. Health."
  The two men touched glasses, Seratard
churning the proposal around to find the pitfalls,
any places where his adversary had
planted mines to disrupt French interests. There were
none. On the contrary, this helped his long-term
plan to ingratiate himself into Yoshi's confidence,
making him realize the British were the barbarians,
not the French, and that France, which he equated with
himself, could be trusted to be more patient and far
seeing. "Marvelous vintage, William.
En principe, yes but I'd like to consult my
Admiral."
  "Why not? Then that's what we'll do ..."
  Lunch had been pleasant. In good time they were
aboard and now Sir William swung nimbly
on deck as the cutter tied up alongside the
Brock wharf, an unheard-of happening. He
saw Gornt with a clerk beside some trunks near the
jetty steps. "Hope you didn't mind, Mr.
Gornt," he said. "I commandeered the cutter,
it's under my flag not Struan's."
  "My pleasure, Sir William. How was the
meeting?"
  "Damn fellow didn't turn up, didn't
expect us I suppose."
  "He's lost face from here to Timbuktu."
  "Q." Which was the whole idea, Sir
William thought with a secret smile and pointed
to the trunks. "You're not leaving surely?"
  "No suh, but I am going to Hong Kong
by tonight's packet to arrange building supplies for
ourselves and others."
  "Good idea. Have a safe journey and safe
return." He raised his hat and walked off with
Seratard. Tyrer, sick with tiredness, reeled
after them, hardly acknowledging Gornt.
  "Put these aboard, Periera," Gornt said.
"Tell the Captain I'll be aboard in good
time. Oh hello, Doc." Hoag hurried up
with some coolies bowed under a sea trunk and
bags.
  "I say, Edward, heard you're on the
Atlanta Belle too." Hoag was out of
breath and harassed, his clothes and hands bloodstained
and filthy, eyes red-rimmed. "Could I
prevail on your people to put these aboard for me,
I've still a dozen or so arms and legs to set and
burns ... thanks awfully." He rushed off,
not waiting for an answer.
  "Put 'em aboard, Periera." Gornt
frowned. Why is Hoag in such a hurry
to leave? he asked himself.
  Everything packed that should be, everything
done to ensure Brock's would operate
correctly while he was away: which traders
to give credit to, which to deny; tomorrow or the next
day Choshu representatives were due to discuss
arms shipments--a nice business to acquire for
himself when the Brocks went under and, as also
planned, he acquired the premises and staff
here at ... well, fire sale prices. He
laughed to himself at the joke. Next, the Yoshi
coal concession that he had heard might be
transferred from Struan's to Seratard through the
late Andr`e Poncin's trading company, might
still be available to offers. He had instructed his
shroff to make such an offer secretly.
  Periera was left in charge. Last night,
hearing from Maureen that Jamie's new offices were
gone, he had planned to appoint Jamie, but
to his surprise this afternoon Jamie had thanked him
and refused, saying he thought he would be able
to re-start his own business.
  Jamie would be more icing on the icing, he thought.
Doesn't matter, Jamie'll take over for
me when this is all Rothwell-Gornt's. He
felt in his pocket.
  Norbert's chop was there and the two backdated
letters for Tess. His money belt was heavy with more
than enough Brock silver Mex and gold for
expenses. Good. All done.
  Now for Angelique.

  "Hello Edward," she said, her smile warm.
This was the first time she had received him in her
upstairs boudoir. Ah Soh stood by a wine
cooler and he noticed the door to the bedroom was
closed, curtains were drawn though the light had not
yet completely gone, oil lamps lit, the
room feminine, inviting, her manner demure,
odd. His tension increased.
  "White wine for a change," she said
pleasantly. "La Doucette. Bourbon if you
wish."
  "Wine, please, Ma'am. I've never seen
you look better."
  "Nor you, my friend. Please sit here, by the
fire." Her afternoon, blue-black mourning dress
was new, the cut enhancing, the neckline
square-cut and modest. But for his pleasure, and
hers, she had draped a multicolored silk
shawl around her shoulders, the effect startling, a
breath of spring on this January day.
"Ah Soh, wine," she said, and when they had the
glasses, "Wait outside! I want, I
call!" The maid shuffled out and carelessly banged
the door closed.
  Gornt said softly, "She'll have her ear hard
against it."
  Angelique laughed. "To hear secrets?
What secrets could there be between us? To a safe
journey, Edward!" She sipped and put her
glass down. "You're all packed?"
  "Yes, yes I am. You look wonderful and
I love you and would like an answer to my question."
  Her fan slid open and she began using it as it
should be used by a young lady of quality with an
eligible man of quality--and ones of dubious
reputation--to tantalize, flirt, to promise but
not promise, to give answers, or avoid them,
to questions that were dangerous to acknowledge openly.
  The fan fluttered. "I admire you greatly,
Edward."
  "No more than I admire you. But a yes or
a no?"
  The fan snapped shut. Then she smiled and
opened a box on the bureau, handed him an
envelope. It was addressed: Mrs. Tess
Struan. "Please read the letter. I am sending it
by Hoag to Hong Kong in answer to hers."
  Her handwriting was neat:

Dear Mrs. Struan, Thank you for your letter,
and generosity.
  I agree to everything you requested: I
solemnly swear and agree freely to relinquish
all and any claims to your son's estate, I
agree never again to use the title Mrs.
Struan, I agree I am Catholic and was
never married according to my Church, I agree never
to set foot in Hong Kong except for
transshipping, or will ever try to contact you and any
of your family, I agree to remove myself from these
premises within the week, and accept, with sincere
thanks, the offer of a trust of Two Thousand
Guineas a year until I am dead.

  The space for her signature was blank and then
below it: Verified as a true signature
by Sir William Aylesbury, Minister
Japan, and another space for his signature and
date.
  Gornt looked up. "You can't mean
this. This gives her everything."
  "Didn't you advise me to accept her
conditions?"
  "Yes, but to compromise--to renegotiate."
  "Ah, yes, I remembered that. If you
agree I'll ask Sir William to witness it
now, before you leave. Dr. Hoag has promised
to take it tonight on your ship, so it will be there when you
arrive."
  "But surely you know this yields everything--how can
I, or anyone negotiate for you?"
  "There's a second page." She took it out
of the box, her fan slid open and began to move.
Gently.
  Again he concentrated. The writing was not so clear
and here and there smudged--could those be tear stains, he
asked himself?

Dear Mrs. Struan, for obvious reasons this
part must be separate as it is just between us, and no
concern of Sir William. Again I thank you for
your generosity. The kind offer of a third thousand if
I remarry, or marry as you would say, within a
year, I cannot accept because I do not intend
to remarry or marry whichever you consider correct
...

  Again he looked up at her startled. "Is this
my answer?"
  The fan fluttered. "Finish it," she said.
  Now his eyes flashed down the page:

Before God, I cannot avoid the belief I was
married, though freely relinquish any public
and legal pretension to that state as above. I will not
take another ... I do not wish to hurt or
offend you but to marry again ... no. It is my
intention as soon as possible to settle in
London, I feel more English than French,
my mother tongue English rather than French, my
aunt was my real mother.
  I will never use the Mrs. title as I have
agreed but I cannot stop others here referring to me as
such. Sir William will not accept
Angelique, or Angelique Richaud but
insists that I sign as Mrs. Angelique
Struan, n@ee Richaud, to make the above
binding, for, according to him, and his understanding of English
law, that is presently my legal name until
I remarry.

  "Has he said that?" he asked sharply.
  "No, but Mr. Skye says if asked, he
would have to agree."
  "Ah." Gornt nodded thoughtfully, gulped some
wine and went on reading, slower and more carefully:

Should any of the above be unsatisfactory,
please draw up what you further require,
give it to Mr. Gornt who tells me he is
going to see you again, then to return here almost
immediately, and I will sign it. I commend him to you,
he was a very good friend to your son, and has been kind
to me--he advised me to accept your kind conditions
as Mr. Skye was against. Sincerely yours ...
Angelique.

  Gornt sat back, exhaled and stared at her,
awed. "It's marvelous. Marvelous. You agree
to everything but still hold the sword of Damocles
over her."
  The fan stopped. "How so?"
  "You plan to live in London therefore under
English law, a latent, obvious threat. Never
once do you use "husband" but that threat is there,
you put me squarely on center stage as friend
to both sides and in a perfect negotiating
position. And however devious she is, whatever she
draws up for you to sign, you can shed more tears and
sigh, Duress, and would win. Twenty-four carat
marvelous!"
  "Then I should ask Sir William to witness
my signature?"
  "Yes," he said, enthralled by her, so clever and
daring, and dangerous. Perhaps too dangerous. "This
is checkmate."
  "How so?"
  "Tess is safe in only one way: if you
remarry and you've blocked that." Though the fan
stopped, her eyes watched him over the edge. Then
the movement began again and he handed her back the
letter, thinking, Devilishly clever--for you, but not for
me. "Skye advised you brilliantly."
  "No one advised me, except you--something you
said guided me."
  His heart skipped. "No one else has seen
this?"
  "No. And no one else will. It can be secret
between us."
  He heard the "can be" and wondered
where that led, despondent now but hiding it. The
fire in the grate needed attention so he got up
and used the poker to give himself time to think. The air
was still strong with the smell of smoke and burning but he
did not register it, only her.
  How in the hell did she figure that all out?
It's totally brilliant, all the pieces are
on the board, for both of us. She's won, she'll
beat Tess, but I've lost. I'll still have
to negotiate for her, and now I'm surer than
hell I can up her stipend, but Angelique's
conceded nothing and left her game plan open.
I've lost. I don't share in the big prize:
Her. "So the answer to my question is No, must be
No?"
  Only the fan moved. "Why?" she asked,
without emotion.
  "Because the moment you do, you lose the game, you
lose all power over Tess Struan."
  "Yes, I would." She closed the fan
quietly and let it rest in her lap. Her eyes
never left his, nor their intensity.
  For a moment he felt hypnotized, then his mind
flared into action, and sudden hope spread through him.
"I would, you said, meaning you would. But I
wouldn't? I wouldn't lose power?"
  Now she smiled. It was an answer.
  The Mona Lisa again, he thought, strange how
her face changes, how I think it changes, how
really devious she is, and how vigilant I'm
going to have to be to tame this filly. I still don't
understand but a faint heart never won a fair
lady. It took all of his will to keep his feet
planted where they were. "I love you for all the
usual reasons, and I love your cleverness.
Now, formally, please, will you marry me?"
  "Yes," she said.

                 

  "Hallelujah!" Gornt said, lightheaded,
but did not move from the fireplace.
  The fan stopped. "Hallelujah? Is that
all?" she murmured, heart picking up tempo.
  "Oh no, but first tell me what are your
conditions."
  She laughed. "Should there be conditions?"
  "I'm beginning to know the way your mind works--some
of the time."
  "When will you board Atlanta
Belle?"
  "At the last moment. There's much to ...
to talk about."
  "Yes. Edward, would our children be brought up
Catholic, and would we be married in a Catholic
church?"
  "Is that a condition?"
  "A question."
  He frowned, letting his mind race ahead and
all around, wanting to be cautious in this
rock-infested sea. "I don't see why not.
I'm not Catholic as you know," he said slowly,
"but if that's what you want it would be all right--"
The final piece of the jigsaw blinded him with its
power. "Hallelujah!"
  "What?"
  "Just an idea. We'll talk about in a
minute. Now, no more games, Angelique,"
he said, chiding her. "Conditions? What's in that
magic mind of yours?"
  She got up. On tiptoe she touched her
lips to his in a gentle kiss. Her lips were
soft and breath sweet. "Thank you for asking me,
and for what you've already done for me."
  He rested his hands on her hips. Both
noticed that their bodies seemed to fit though neither
acknowledged it.
  "The conditions?"
  "Tell me what they are, Edward."
  Now that she had answered the main question, and had
given him the keys, he was in no hurry.
"I'll guess three," he said, amused. "If
I'm right, you'll tell me the rest?"
  "Agreed." His body, hard against hers was
pleasing to her. And so was her soft curving against him,
diverting his concentration. Effortlessly. Careful,
it's her major trump card and this game's now in
its most dangerous stage--to settle the future.
Goddam! Easy enough to make the kiss more serious,
too easy, and easy then to whisk her off her
feet to the bed in the next room and lose--whatever
the result--even before you reach the door.
  It was more exciting for him to hold back, to wait
for the perfect moment--as with Morgan Brock--
to accept the fact of his lust and put it aside and
try to inject his mind into hers instead. Three
conditions? I know at least five, he thought,
wanting to win, needing to win as in everything.
  "Not necessarily in this order," he said.
"One is that I successfully
renegotiate upwards, say at least to four
thousand a year. Another that we spend time in
Paris and London, say a month every two years
--with travelling time, that'll be about a six months
trip. Next, that Tess's trust money,
whatever it is, stays under your control, not mine."
He saw her eyes dancing and knew he had
won. "And another for good measure, that I must
love you madly forever."
  "You're so clever, Edward, I know we will be very
happy." The strange smile returned. "Now,
five would be better than four, and two months
better than one."
  "I'll try for five though I can't
promise," he said at once, "and agree to two
months in Paris, all other things being equal.
What else?"
  "Nothing important. We will need a house in
Paris, but once you know it you will love it too.
Nothing else, except you promise to cherish
me."
  "No need to ask that, but I promise." His
arms tightened around her. She rested against him,
fitting, feeling protected, though still not sure of
him. "You're more desirable than any woman
I've ever known," he said. "That's bad enough, but
your mind is stunning too, and your scheming--no,
that's a bad word--your flights of brilliance
..." For a moment he held her away from him,
looking at her deeply. "You're a stunner, which
ever way."
  She smiled and did not move out of his arms.
"How so?"
  "A Catholic marriage."
  "Ah!"
  "Yes, ah!" He laughed. "That, my clever
young lady, is your dream solution because, together with
your letter, it suddenly occurred to me what you'd already
decided: a Catholic marriage removes you as
a threat from Tess forever. For Tess, a
Catholic marriage completely negates the
Protestant, seaborne marriage, however
lawful, before English law however lawful."
  She chuckled, nestling against him. "If you were
to say you thought you could persuade me to marry you, and
then, you as a Protestant, were to offer to make such
a deliberate sacrifice, surely that woman
would be pleased to give you what you want, for both of
us, if the requests are reasonable. No?"
  "Yes." He sighed. "What
request had you in mind?"
  "Nothing much, but Malcolm explained to me
once the importance of the Jockey Club, both
in Hong Kong and Shanghai, how, together with the
Shanghai and Hong Kong Councils, all
business power is centered there. Her influence would
get you a Stewardship of one and a seat on the
other. No?"
  He laughed and hugged her. "You're classic,
Ma'am. For that I'd even become Catholic."
  "No need for that, Edward."
  "You're going to love Shanghai. Now I have
conditions."
  "Oh?"
  He was glad to see a flash of concern behind her
eyes, and hid his pleasure and made his face
sterner. No need for me to make prior conditions,
he thought amused: a husband has inalienable rights,
like possessing all a wife's worldly goods.
Thank God for this man's world. "First condition is
that you love me with all your heart and soul."
  "Oh I will try, and try to be the best wife
ever." Her arms tightened. "And?"
  He heard the edge of underlying concern and laughed.
"That's all, except you promise to let me
teach you bridge, and mah-jongg--then you'll never
need pin money from me or anyone."
  She stared at him a moment, then reached up.
Their kiss sealed their bargain and then he eased
off, too heated. "I can hardly wait,
Angelique."
  "Nor I."
  "Now we must plan, there's not much time. First
get Sir William's signature, quick as a
wink. My darling, I'm so happy you've
accepted me."
  She felt like purring. "I'm more happy than
I can say. When you get back, do we stay here
or leave for Shanghai?"
  "Shanghai, as soon as possible--soon as the
Brocks go under." He kissed her nose.
  "Ah the Brocks. You're sure? You're
sure about them? Our whole future, everything
depends on that, doesn't it?"
  "And Tess, but yes, my evidence is enough,
and her venom will cement their ruin--she must realize
it too or she'd never have made even this paltry
offer. Even so, we must be careful, what we're
like in private, that's different, but for six months
--it'll take me that long to get you
to Shanghai, your reputation blemishless,
Rothwell-Gornt into place, your finances--we
must act like good friends only. I adore you."
  For answer her arms tightened again. Then she
said, "Is it your custom to make a marriage
contract?"
  "No. But if you wish it, we will." He saw
the smile that masked and promised and masked.
"It's not necessary, is it? We're interlinked, our
future's joined, we're one entity even now.
Success depends on our joint performance, and on
me for us. Never forget Tess is adroit,
cunning and won't be cheated, a deal is a deal with
her. Even so, I promise you'll get what you
want."
  Yes I will, she thought.

  In shock, Sir William put the last of
Andr`e's pages onto the side table, all of
them in French and in Andr`e's handwriting. "My
God," he muttered and shifted in his frayed,
comfortable old chair. His anteroom was pleasant,
a fire burning merrily, his curtains drawn
against the drafts.
  He got up, feeling very old, poured a
drink, stared at the file of papers in disbelief,
then again sat and leafed through them. The final part of
Angelique's father's letter, carefully pasted
together, clearly suggested a calculated scheme
to snare Malcolm Struan, other pages set out
dates and details of the ronin assassin's rape
at Kanagawa and curious death at the French
Legation, the name of the mama-san who supplied the
medicine, how the "lost earrings" paid for it, and
how Andr`e had rowed out to sea to dispose of the
evidence--some towels, the herbs, and one of the two
bottles, the other left as proof, now waiting in
his Legation desk drawer.
  His covering letter had said,

Sir William, by the time you read this I am
already dead. This evidence is to be used if I
meet a violent end. I openly confess I
used my knowledge to extract money from Angelique,
yes, blackmail if you wish to put a word to it,
but then blackmail is a diplomatic tool which
you've used, as we all have. This information is given
you as I may have been murdered, or my death
made to look accidental, not necessarily by her
but because of her, assisted by her--another
truth is that quite a few would commit murder for her
(babcott, McFay, Gornt)--because of my
unique knowledge and participation in her ...
"crimes" is too strong a word ... her
manipulations makes me a target.
  These pages give you evidence to catch the
murderer and lay the blame where it eventually will
lead. I bear Angelique no ill will, I
used her as I needed though never bedded her. If
my death appears accidental it may not be. If
is, so be it, I've made my confession (though
told none of the above to Father Leo) and go before you
into the great adventure--as unclean as most, much more
than most, God help me.
  Why have I given you this, and not Henri? Why
indeed?

  It was boldly signed.
  "Why me indeed?" Sir William muttered,
"and how is it possible that that slip of a girl could
hide all this for so long, hide it from Malcolm
Struan for God's sake? From George and
Hoag for God's sake? Impossible, surely
impossible, Andr`e must have taken leave of his
senses and yet ..."
  Apart her father's letter--and even that, taken out of
context, could be an exaggeration of the truth--the rest
is just Andr`e's opinion, unless she's challenged
and confesses. These stories could be fabrications
of a demented mind. Of course he wanted her
too, how many times have we all noticed him
letching after her and there was that curious happening when
Vervene found him in her room. And bloody
curious he used "unclean" like that, when he
really was, poor fellow.
  He shuddered. Seratard had whispered Andr`e's
secret to him. Syphilis was endemic in all
strata of society, in all cities, towns and
villages, in St. Petersburg, London,
Paris, in palaces as well as the vilest areas
of the Casbah, it could lurk in any whorehouse
or with any Lady of the Night, in China or in
our Floating World here.
  Ah Andr`e, why give all this to me?
Curious you died as you did, hand in hand with the girl
you bought to destroy. How evil! Except she had
a choice, so we are led to believe. Your death was
an accident. Was it? Henri's not sure.
  "It's all very curious, William,"
Henri had said this morning. "The
bodies, skeletons would be more accurate, lay
as though they were dead before the fire arrived, no
sign of trying to escape by either of them. Just side
by side, hands together. I'm bewildered, for all his
faults Andr`e was a survivor, and in a fire
it's instinct to try to escape, you don't just lie
there, you can't, not possible."
  "Then what's the answer?"'
  "I don't know. It could have been a suicide
pact that was concluded before the fire. Poison,
nothing else would fit. It's true he was
morbid recently to the point of insanity, and
needed money desperately to pay for her. Apart from
that, Andr`e a suicide? Do you believe that?"'
  No, not Andr`e, Sir William thought
disquieted. Was he poisoned, or both of them.
Now there's a motive for murder. Good God
Almighty, is that possible? Yes it is but who?
  Wearily, greatly troubled, he closed his
eyes. The more he tried to answer that question the more
distracted he became. The door opened
silently. His Number One Boy padded in,
began to greet him but seeing the paleness and age
on his Master's face, frowned, presumed him
to be sleeping, so poured a whisky and put it
quietly beside him on the table. His eyes flicked
over Andr`e's letters that were atop the file, then,
as silently, he went out.
  A few minutes later there was a knock.
Sir William awoke with a start as Babcott
popped his head in. "Got a minute?"
  "Oh, hello, George, of course." Sir
William put the letters into a folder grimly
aware of the attraction they seemed to radiate.
"Take a seat, like a drink, what's up?"
  "Nothing." Babcott was more tired than ever
before. "Won't stay, just wanted to say I'm going
to get a few hours sleep. The count so far is
three fellows from Drunk Town, one an
Australian barkeeper and two vagrants, no
papers--there may be other bodies in the
wreckage but who knows when the cleanup will be
finished. No one seems very concerned."
  "What about the village and Yoshiwara?"
  "We'll never get a count." Babcott
yawned. "They seem to consider those sorts of
statistics national secrets. Can't blame them,
we're the outsiders. Not many casualties I'd
imagine. Same on our Yoshiwara, thank
God--you heard that each Inn had an
emergency cellar?"
  "Damn clever. We'd better institute the
same idea."
  "Pity about Andr`e ..." Babcott said, and
at once another twinge went through Sir
William. "... we were terribly lucky more of
our people didn't get caught, how Phillip got
out with his life I just don't know. William,
he's badly shaken up by the loss of his girl,
why not give him a couple of weeks leave, let
him go to Hong Kong or Shanghai?"
  "Work's his best therapy, and I need him here."
  "Maybe you're right." Another yawn.
"God, I'm tired. You know Hoag's on the
packet tonight?"
  "He told me earlier, 'least he said he'd
asked you and you didn't need him. I suppose
Tess ordered him to report as soon as he
knew--if she wasn't bearing."
  "Yes. Part's personal, William, he's
suddenly frantic to go back to India, thinks his
happiness lies there. Hope he does, he's a
grand doctor but talks too much." A frown and a
stifled yawn. "Did he tell you what was in
Tess's letter?"
  "To Angelique? No. He said she didn't
show it to him. Difficult to call that one, in more
ways than you can shake a stick at," Sir
William said, watching him closely.
"Heavenly was here earlier, he said nothing about it
either, only that she wanted me to witness her
signature to a letter she was sending Tess."
  Some of Babcott's tiredness went away.
"I'd certainly like to know what's in it."
  "I'll only be party to witnessing it. Rightly
I don't need to know the contents."
  Babcott sighed, yawned again. "I feel so
terribly sorry for her, wish I could help,
I'd do anything ... such a nice girl and so
unfair. For her and Malcolm. Well I'm
off, glad she's not leaving us yet, she'll make
someone a spectacular wife. See you in a few
hours."
  "Have a good sleep, and thanks for all the good
work. By the way," Sir William said, not
wanting him to leave, but afraid if he stayed he
would be tempted to share Andr`e's evidence, to ask
his advice. "When do you see Anjo again?"
  "In a week or two, when the laudanum's
used up--without that he'll be a most
unhappy man."
  "No hope for him?"
  "No. He won't last but a few months, the
tests are fairly accurate--his insides are
in a mess. Yoshi's our man." Another aching
yawn. "Do you think Anjo, or Yoshi, or
both ordered the arson?"
  "Either or neither or both, we'll never know."
He watched Babcott limp for the door.
"George, medically, if a woman was sedated,
could a fellow take her and she'd not know about it?"
  Babcott blinked and turned back, fatigue
fled. "What on earth made you ask that?"
  "Just a sudden thought, you mentioned laudanum. A
couple of days ago Zergeyev had some wild
theories about drugs, the good and the bad of them. Could
that happen?"
  After a pause, Babcott nodded, not believing
that excuse. He knew how subtle Willie's
mind was, and wondered the why of the question but was too
smart to ask again. "If the dose was strong and the
man not savage, yes, no problem." He
waited but Sir William only nodded
thoughtfully so he waved a hand and left.
  Once more Sir William opened the file.
  His fingers trembled as he re-read Andr`e's
covering letter. It's clear enough. The drug in
Kanagawa started the chain of events,
George's drug. If she'd awakened the man
would have killed her, no doubt about that. So she was
saved but destroyed. But why didn't the man
kill her anyway, why leave her alive?
Doesn't make sense, any of it. And what
happened in the French Legation that other night when
he returned? If it hadn't been for George
...
  And what about George? If he could give her
such a drug to help her sleep, to guard her
sanity, surely he could easily do the same
to Andr`e to remove a blackmailer from the woman
he clearly loves. An overdose of the same
drug ...
  George Babcott? Good God I must be
losing my wits. Impossible for him to do that!
  Is it?
  And Angelique, impossible for her to have done
all that!
  Is it?
  What the hell do I do?
                                 
                 

  "Excuse me, sir," Bertram said.
"Miss Angelique's here."
  "Show them in. Then you can leave. Dinner's at
nine. Make sure the Belle doesn't leave
without my dispatches."
  "Yes sir. It's just her, Mr. Skye's not
with her."
  Sir William eased out of his old chair,
tired and feeling bad, Andr`e's file facedown
on his desk.
  She came in, physically as magnetic as
always, but different, her face set, and with an
undercurrent he could not read. Topcoat, bonnet
and gloves. Black suits her, he thought,
sets off her fair skin, so pretty and young,
younger than Vertinskya. Curious, has she been
crying? "Good evening, how are you, Angelique?"
  "Oh, all right, thank you," she said, her
voice flat and unlike her usual, poised
self. "Mr. Skye told you I needed you
to verify my signature tonight?"
  "Yes." He went to his desk, his concentration
damaged by the pictures Andr`e had painted so
vividly. "I ... please sit down." She
obeyed and as he looked at her another shadow
went past her lovely eyes. "What's the
matter?" he asked kindly.
  "Nothing. I, this afternoon I heard about Andr`e,
that he'd, he'd been killed. I would have come
earlier but I ..." With a visible effort she
brushed that aside, took the envelope from her
purse and laid the paper on the table. "How should
I sign it please?"
  He steepled his fingers, unsettled that again, so
soon, Andr`e's spectre had invaded the room
--not at his whim. "I'm not really sure. I
understand from Skye you have agreed with Mrs. Tess
Struan, amongst other conditions, to renounce your
Mrs. title?"
  "Please, you may read the letter if you wish,"
she said, dully.
  "Thank you but that's not necessary," he said, resisting
his overwhelming impulse to read the short document.
"What you agree with her is not my business,
unless you need my advice?"
  Numb, she shook her head.
  "Well then ... Skye has a legal
theory, I'm not certain if he's
correct but I see no reason against it. You are
renouncing the "Mrs." title for all time. But
as he so rightly pointed out, only after you've
signed so you'd best sign it, Mrs.
Angelique Struan, n@ee Angelique
Richaud and that should cover all
possibilities."
  He watched her concentrate, his mind filled
with the appalling story Andr`e had related from a
fiery grave--not possible for her to hide so much from
us, not bloody possible.
  "There," she said. "Now it's done."
  "I feel obliged to ask: you're sure you're
doing the right thing--no one's forcing you in any way
to sign this document, whatever it contains?"
  "I sign freely. She, she offered a
settlement, Sir William. The truth is
... the truth is, it is fair. Some of the
clauses are badly put, and could be improved,
perhaps will be, but Malcolm was her son, she has
a right to be distraught." She got up, put the
letter into the envelope and into her bag, wanting to leave
quickly, wanting to stay. "Thank you."
  "Don't go for a moment. Would you, perhaps you'd
care to dine tomorrow, just a few of the fellows? I was
thinking of asking Jamie and Miss Maureen."
  "Well, yes, thank you, I think so but I
.... They're nice, and she's sweet. Will they
get married, do you think?"
  "If he doesn't, more the fool him--she'll
be snapped up if he doesn't." Before he could
stop himself he said, "Sad about Andr`e, wasn't
it? Did Henri tell you how they found him?"
Abruptly he saw her eyes fill and her
control disappear. "Sorry, I didn't mean
to upset you."
  "You didn't, I'm already so upset I ...
I still can't ... Henri told me an hour or so
ago, how Andr`e and she together ... the Will of God
for them, so sad and yet so wonderful."
  She sat down, brushing at her tears,
remembering how she had almost fainted and after Henri
had gone she had rushed to the church and knelt before the
statue of the Blessed Virgin--the church oddly
changed, lofty without its roof, but the candles
alight as always, the Peace there as always. And she
had given thanks, desperate thanks for releasing
her from servitude--andwitha sudden, heartfelt
understanding, for releasing him from torment too, Andr`e
as much as her. "I understand that now. Oh
Blessed Mother thank you for blessing us, for blessing me and
blessing him, he's with her and at peace when he
knew no peace on earth but now they're safe in
Thine arms, Thy Will be done ..."
  Her eyes could hardly make out Sir
William through her sorrow and gratitude.
"Henri told me about Andr`e's disease. Poor
man, how terrible, and terrible to be so much in
love, he was, you know, utterly. Andr`e was
kind to me and, and to be truthful," she said, needing
to say the truth aloud, "he was awful too but a
friend. He was just madly in love with his Hinodeh,
nothing else in the world mattered so he should be
excused. Did you ever see her?"
  "No, no never did, didn't even know her
name." In spite of a resolve to leave well
alone he said, "Why was he awful?"
  She used a handkerchief to dry her tears, her
voice sad and without anger. "Andr`e knew about
my father and my uncle and, and used it and other things
to, to put me in his debt and kept asking me for
money which I didn't have, making wild promises
and, to be honest, threats." Searchingly she looked
at him, no guile in her now, open and so
thankful to God and the Blessed Virgin for releasing
her and him, the past consumed with him, and all the
filth. "It was the Will of God," she said
fervently. "I'm glad and sorry. Why can't
we forget the bad and only remember the good--
there's enough bad in this world to make up for our
forgetting, don't you think?"
  "Yes, there is," he said with untoward
compassion, his eyes straying to Vertinskya's
miniature. "Oh yes."
  This rare show of emotion in him triggered something in
her and before she knew it she was telling her innermost
fear: "You're wise and I have to tell someone, I
feel cleansed like never before but it's my Malcolm
that worries me, it's just that I've nothing left
of him, no name, no daguerreotype--it never
came out--no portrait, and I can't seem
to find his features. Every day it seems a little
worse.
  "I'm frightened," she said, tears in flood,
silently, sitting there in front of him, him
powerless to move, "It's almost as though he's never
been and this whole journey and time in Yokohama
is like a ... a Th@e@atre Macabre.
I'm married but not, accused of awful things that never
happened or were never meant or never
intended, innocent but not, I'm hated by Tess when
I only wanted to do the best I could for my
Malcolm, oh yes I knew he was vastly
eligible and my father not, and me not, I suppose
not, but I didn't do anything to hurt him, he
loved me and wanted to marry me and I tried my
best, I swear I did, and now that he's dead
I'm trying so hard to be sensible, I'm alone and
he's gone and I have to think of the future, I'm
frightened, I was a child when I arrived, now I'm
different, it's all too fast, and the worst is I
can't remember his face, it's slipping away and
there's nothing. ... Poor Malcolm."

                 

  In the twilight, on the edge of No Man's
Land and in the lee of a half completed village
house, a shadow moved. Then another. Two men
were lurking in hiding, waiting. Somewhere amid the
temporary village of lean-tos and shelters and
partially built huts, and subdued chattering, a child
began to cry to be quickly hushed.
  Where once No Man's Land had been a
series of hills and valleys of garbage and
castaway junk, most had been consumed, the rest
settled deeper into the earth, and over all, a
thick mat of ash and threads of smoke. Only the
brick well head was prominent. The first shadow
became Phillip Tyrer and he rushed for the well
head, keeping low, and ducked down beside it.
  Cautiously he examined the surroundings. As
far as he could tell he had not been seen. Across
the way, Drunk Town was just smoking rubble and
twisted remains, a few isolated fires still
smoldering, temporary lean-tos, tarpaulin or
canvas shelters. A few men about, quarrelsome,
most of them hunched against the cold on upturned
kegs, drinking looted beer and spirits.
  Phillip carefully leaned over the edge of the
well and whistled. From below there was an answering
whistle. He ducked down again, stifled a nervous
yawn. In a moment a hand reached the top
bricks. Hiraga's head appeared. Phillip
beckoned him. Silently Hiraga squatted
beside him, then Akimoto. Both wore padded
jackets and kimonos over loose pants and
carried their swords camouflaged with spare
clothing. Warily they ducked down as three men
on the Drunk Town side began
crossing near where the alley had been and went down
it, picking their way over the remains of the godown.
One was singing a sea chanty. Long after they had
disappeared his rolling baritone came up on the
wind.
  "Follow, but be careful!" Tyrer ran back
to the village shadows and stopped beside the other man
in the lee of the half-finished dwelling. Jamie
McFay. When it was safe, Hiraga and
Akimoto joined them, moving much more lithely,
silently.
  Jamie McFay said, "Here, quick." He
opened the sack and handed them rough seaman's clothes
and woolen balaclavas and shoes. They stripped
and dressed and put their own clothes into the sack which
Akimoto slung on his back. Tyrer saw
Hiraga slip a derringer into a side pocket.
  It had taken barely a minute or two.
Jamie led the way along where the village main
street had once been--and would soon be again. They
could feel eyes everywhere. Above them the moon
came out of the cloud briefly. Automatically
Hiraga and Akimoto froze into shadows, both
men ready to go for their weapons, mentally cursing the
inept carelessness of the other two. The moon
vanished, and they went on.
  The shoya's dwelling was three-quarters
rebuilt, the shop front empty but the living
quarters behind were temporarily finished and livable.
Jamie eased through a pile of beams and shojis and
knocked on a makeshift door. It opened and
he went in. The others followed into darkness. The
door closed.
  In a moment a match struck and the wick of the
candle caught. The shoya was alone, grey with
fatigue and a fear he tried hard to hide. On
the low table were flasks of sak`e, and a little food.
Hiraga and Akimoto wolfed the food and
emptied two of the flasks in seconds. "Thank
you, shoya," Hiraga said. "I will not forget you."
  "Here, Otami-sama." The shoya gave him
a small bag containing coins. "Here are a
hundred gold oban and twenty Mex."
  A brush was on the table, the ink tablet prepared
beside the paper. Hiraga signed the receipt.
"What about my cousin?"
  "So sorry, this was all I could get so
quickly," the shoya said with a sidelong glance at
Jamie the others missed.
  "Never mind." Hiraga did not
believe him but then Akimoto had no credit,
nor anyone to repay the loan as he did.
"Thank you. And please see my guarantor
gets this safely." He gave him a small
scroll. It was a painstakingly coded farewell
note to his mother and father, telling them his plan, and
giving them news about Sumomo. For safety it
contained no real names. In English he said,
"Taira-sama, ready. Here finish."
  "Ready, Jamie?" Tyrer asked, feeling
peculiar, nauseous, not knowing if it was caused
by excitement or fright, tiredness or despair.
Since the fire, every few minutes Fujiko's
face would weld up from his subconscious,
screaming and in flames. "Best hurry,
Otami-sama," he said to Hiraga. Both had
agreed never to use Hiraga or Nakama again.
"Pull your cap more over your face. Domo,
shoya, mataneh." Thank you, shoya, good
night.
  He went out on to the street again. When it was
safe he signalled the others. "You lead,
Jamie," he whispered. In sudden panic they
slid into the shadows as a Grenadier patrol
approached and passed by. Breathing once more
Tyrer muttered, "They're on the watch for
looters, thieves, wakarimasu ka?"
  "Wakarimasu."
  Once more Jamie hurried ahead, turned and
twisted through the rubble towards the jetty on the other
side of the promenade, near the site where the
Guardian building had stood. Many men were
wandering about, gawking at the damage to the village
and Yoshiwara and Drunk Town, or just numb,
too early to sleep yet. Recognizing some of
them, he slowed his pace, not wanting to attract
attention. Dmitri was amongst them, heading
homewards, and he smiled wryly. This morning
Dmitri, beaming, had sought him out to say he had
found Nemi in the early hours and that she was all
right, just a few bruises and hardly touched.
  "Thank God for that, Dmitri."
  "The first thing she said was, Jami-san
okay? I said yes and she gave me a hug for
you. Then I gave her your message, that you'd
find her as soon as possible."
  "Thanks, that's a load off my mind. I was
afraid she was a goner. Eventually I found her
Inn but it was a heap of ash, our house included.
Never did find anyone ... Thank
God."
  "You remember what I--"'
  "I remember, but first I've got to talk
to her. She's not a piece of furniture, for
God's sake."
  "Hey, easy old buddy, perish the thought,
didn't mean to imply anything ..."
  Jamie sighed, picking his way through the
wreckage of a sak`e still, now not far from the
promenade. Dmitri's a good enough fellow, he
thought, but Nemi was special and ...
  "Oh my God, look!" He pointed. A
group of weary samurai fire fighters were
squatting around a bonfire beside the jetty,
brewing tea. Quickly he weighed the
alternatives. There were none. "Can't help it,
come on."
  As they reached the promenade Lunkchurch
reeled out of the darkness. "Jamie," he said
dully, "wot you going to do? You're wiped out like
me ..." He glanced at Phillip, hardly
noticing the other two. They looked like ordinary
Asian seamen of a type abundant in the
merchant fleet. "It's a bastard ..."
  "Maybe it won't be so bad, Barnaby,
I've a few ideas, I'll find you tomorrow."
  Jamie brushed past and walked for the jetty,
raised his hat politely to the fire fighters and
their officer who absently acknowledged them. The
rickety jetty pilings and its wooden walkway
went fifty metres into the sea. His heart
sank. No waiting cutter, and none approaching
from the Struan jetty, to the north. Out in the bay
Atlanta Belle was alight, swarming with
rowboats arriving and leaving.
  Earlier this afternoon Jamie had asked
MacStruan if he could borrow the cutter for a
quick trip this evening to see the captain of the
Belle, Johnny Twomast, an old friend.
Phillip, after leaving Sir William who had
confirmed Hiraga's supposed death, had rushed
over to see him. Stumbling over his words with
excitement, Phillip told him, to his
delight, that Hiraga was alive, hidden in a
Drunk Town well, how the man had saved his
life last night, laying out his scheme to save
him. "We just sneak him aboard the Belle and
no one's the wiser."
  "He's alive? I'd heard about him dying in
the fire--he's alive?"'
  "Yes. All we have to do is sneak him
aboard."
  "I'll ask Johnny Twomast to hide them
but only if you get Willie's approval.
Hiraga is still a murd--"'
  "Hiraga's dead, Nakama, Hiraga,
it's all the same, officially. Willie said it,
the Sergeant confirmed his death in the fire.
Nakama's dead and gone forever, so's Hiraga.
Getting him out on a ship is the perfect
solution and he's worth saving! We're only
helping two samurai students to see the world, our
world, for a year or so, one of them called
Otami."
  "If we get caught, Willie will spit
blood, our blood."
  "There's no reason we should. Otami is
Otami, it's his real name and he's told me about
you and the shoya cooking up all sorts of business
deals, you'll be the winner when he comes back, we
all will. We've got to help him!"
  Finally Jamie had agreed and had seen the
shoya to arrange the loan that he had also
guaranteed. By then it was sunset. At sunset
Tyrer had gone to the well to prepare Hiraga and
Akimoto and now they waited on the jetty.
  "Where's the cutter Jamie?" Tyrer said
nervously.
  "It'll arrive." Feeling highly exposed,
the four men waited at the end of the jetty near the
wobbly, seaweed slicked steps, all too aware
of the nearby samurai, their captain idly
swaggering up and down.
  Hiraga whispered, "Taira-sama, that
captain, remember? He Enforcer. Remember
him, captain at gate?"
  "What gate?"
  "In Yedo. At your Big House in Yedo.
When first meet."
  "Oh my God!" Now it poured back--the
tough samurai who had insisted on searching the
Legation when they had been surrounded and locked in
before the evacuation, Hiraga escaping on a
stretcher disguised as a smallpox sufferer.
  "What's up now?" Jamie said. Tyrer
told him. Over Tyrer's shoulder he could see
the officer glance at them. His anxiety increased.
"He's too bloody curious."
  "I recognize him now," Tyrer was saying.
"We'd better ... Look, there she
is!" The cutter was chugging out of the dark, her riding
lights on but dim. The Bosun waved, they
waved back. Waves against the pilings threw
shards of spray at them.
  "Get aboard, quick as you can," Jamie said, his
excitement increasing. Phillip had convinced him
Hiraga was not an assassin but a fighter for
freedom and, for himself, he already had seen how
useful Hiraga had been. Now he was even more
sure how valuable an English-speaking shishi and
friend would be in the future, particularly one who had
been guided and helped by him--he had prepared a
dossier of people to meet in England and Scotland, where
to go, what to see that he was going to explain before the
ship sailed.
  Phillip's a genius, he chortled, glanced
back at him and drew in breath sharply. Behind
Tyrer he saw the Japanese officer strolling
towards their jetty. "My God, the bugger's coming
for us!" They gaped at the man, took a quick
look at the cutter. No way could she arrive
before he did. "We're done for."
  Hiraga had already decided the same. He
tore at the kimonos covering their swords.
"Akimoto, we kill him."
  "Wait! Here!" Urgently Tyrer handed
Hiraga a large envelope that contained letters of
introduction to his father and uncle, also a
solicitor, and to the dean of his university. "I
was going to explain them on the cutter," he said
hurriedly, "no time now, Jamie, you do it for
me." He looked at Hiraga deeply a last
time and stuck out his hand. "Thanks, I'll always be
your friend, come back safely." He felt the
strong grip, saw for an instant a smile, then
turned and in a cold sweat went to meet the
enemy.
  The captain had already covered half the jetty
when Tyrer planted himself in the middle of the
planks and bowed with great formality. A grunt, the
man hesitated, his hand on his long sword, then
bowed back. When he tried to pass Tyrer bowed
again and said in his best Japanese, deliberately
ponderous, "Ah Sir Officer, I want say
you how samurai men good fight fire.
Remembering from Yedo, yes? Please excuse
me, on behalf my Master, Head Gai-jin in
Nippon, accept great thank for help save
all houses ours."
  "Yes, thank you, now I want
to see th--"
  "See? Look there, Sir Officer!" Tyrer
pointed at the town and all around, his Japanese
dissolving more and more into gibberish as each time the man
tried to walk around him he moved into his path.
"See what fire h--"
  "Out of the way!" the samurai said angrily, his
breath heavy with the stench of daikon,
horseradish. "Move!"
  But Tyrer pretended not to understand and flailed his
arms to block him, trying to make it appear
unintentional and careful not to touch him, saying how
awful the devastation was and how well the samurai
had performed--Jamie and the others were behind him so he
had no way of judging how much time he had, then the
officer snarled, "Baka!" he saw his face
twist with rage and readied for the blow but at that
second he heard Jamie call out, "Cast
off, for Christ's sake!" and he was roughly shoved
aside as the man ran for the boat.
  Panting, Tyrer picked himself up and, wet with
relief, saw the cutter swerving off at full
throttle, the other three ducking into the cabin,
bosun in the wheelhouse, seaman at the prow, the
cabin lights doused the instant the samurai reached
the jetty's head, his bellowing shout, calling them
back, drowned by the engine. The moment before the
lights went out and Hiraga and Akimoto turned
their backs, Tyrer thought he saw their faces
clearly--if he did the officer must have done.
  "Imagination," Phillip gasped, already
hurrying away in the fastest walk possible. He
raised his hat to the samurai around the fire who
acknowledged him perfunctorily, and by the time he
heard the Japanese shout of "You, come here," he
was swallowed in the crowd. When it was safe he
broke into a trot, and did not begin to breathe
until he was safe in the Legation.
  "Good gracious, Phillip," Bertram said,
popeyed, "you poor dear, what on earth's the
matter?"
  "Oh fuck off," Tyrer said, not over the
close call.
  "Why should he do that?" Sir William asked
from his office doorway, his face taut and voice
harsh.
  "Oh, oh sorry sir, it was ... just a
pleasantry."
  An irritable grunt greeted that.
"Phillip, your brains are addled!
Where the devil have you been? There's a note from the
Bakufu marked urgent on your desk
to translate, a dispatch for Sir Percy to copy
that must go with Atlanta Belle tonight, four
insurance claims to stamp--I've already signed and
approved them. When you've done that come and find
me. I'll either be here or at the jetty seeing the
passengers off--well don't just stand there!
Hurry up!"
  Sir William went back into his office and
closed his door and leaned against it. Inexorably
his eyes went to Andr`e's file neatly centered
on his desk. Sadness welled up again.
  When Angelique had left he had hardly
moved for an hour or more, trying to decide,
desperate to be correct, for truly this was a
life and death issue. His mind had wandered into the
byways of his own experience: to his boyhood in
England, to the Paris Desk, to St.
Petersburg, his house there and the garden and laughing
with Vertinskya in spring and summer and autumn and
winter, loving her; then back to England again,
to missions in the battlefields of the Crimea, and
into swirling, smoky dark passages that frightened
him.
  He was glad that Phillip's voice had
drawn him back to normality. Again his eyes
wandered over the room and the fire and to the file,
passed that to the lovely young face in the miniature
smiling at him. His heart broke as it always did
and then repaired itself. A little less each time.
  He went over and picked the miniature up and
studied it, every brush stroke already etched on his
mind. If I didn't have her portrait, would
I have forgotten her face as Angelique and her
Malcolm? "No answer to that one, Vertinskya,
my darling," he said sadly, near tears, setting
it down again. "Maybe I would--your face--but
never you, never never never you."
  And much as he tried to go back to live again the
time he had been most alive, Andr`e's file was
an iron door between them.
  God damn him!
  Never mind that, make the decision. No more
shillyshallying, he ordered himself. Back to work,
deal with this problem so you can go on to more important
matters like Yoshi and the coming war against Satsuma--
you are Her Britannic Majesty's Minister.
Act like one!
  The correct and only proper way
to deal with Andr`e's file is to seal it, to write
a private report that relates what occurred
and when, what was said and by whom, then to seal that and send
it all to London and let them decide. Lots
of secrets in their vaults and archives. If they
want it to be secret, that's up to them.
  Good, that's the correct, right and only course.
  Confident he was making the right decision, he
gathered the pages and, one by one, fed them to the
fire, humming to himself, watching them curl and
blacken and burn. This isn't ill-advised.
They're not positive proof and anyway the poor
girl was a victim, Andr`e was a dangerous and
active undercover agent for an enemy power and if
half the evils listed in his secret dossier are
correct, he deserved to go over the moon a
dozen times. Truth or lies, in this instance dust
is going to dust.
  When it was done he raised his glass to the
miniature, feeling very good. "For you, my darling,"
he said.




                 

  It was getting towards midnight when Tyrer
finally hurried out of the Legation and headed for the
Struan jetty. His head ached like never before, he
had had no time for supper, no time to think about
Hiraga or Fujiko, no time to do anything but
work. He carried an official H.m.
Government dispatch satchel and in his pocket was the
translation that he had done last and wished he had
done first. His pace quickened.
  The jetty was thronged. A few people were there seeing
off the last of the passengers, but most of the men
noisily surrounded the Belle's Purser who
was accepting last-minute mail for Hong Kong and
Shanghai Head Offices--insurance agents,
suppliers, shippers, banks--anyone and everyone
who needed to know about the fire and damage. He
saw Angelique chatting with Gornt. On the
other side of the crowd Pallidar was talking to some
officers who were boarding as passengers, and near the
head of the jetty he spotted Sir William in
conversation with Maureen Ross. Seeing her immediately
reminded him of Jamie and Hiraga, and of his
promise to Jamie to clear the
"students" with his superior. He eased through the
crowd.
  "Evening, Miss Maureen, excuse me
Sir William, but you might want to see this."
He handed him the translation. "I'll make
sure the dispatches get safe aboard." Quickly
he turned away for the Purser, not wanting to stay
close at hand for the inevitable explosion. The
Purser was a short, dyspeptic man and the
haphazard queue of men jostling for position around
him was still long. Tyrer pushed his way to the head,
disregarding the "Wait your bloody turn,"
saying, "Sorry, Sir William's orders,
H.m.'s business. A receipt, please."
  "All right, all right, wot's the bloody
rush, eh?" While the Purser laboriously
entered the shipment in his ledger, Tyrer peeked at
Sir William who had moved under the oil lamp
and was squinting at the paper. While he watched,
the face contorted, the lips began to mouth
profanities, men nearby backed off in shock,
not because of the language but merely because it was so
unexpected. He groaned and turned his back.
  The document was from the roju, signed
Tair@o Nori, curt, without the usual
flowery phrases, and addressed impudently,
To the Leader of the Gai-jin, so he had
translated it as best he could in the same
fashion, interpolating it where necessary:

The roju congratulates you and other gai-jin
on your escape with your lives and little else from
fires started by malcontents and revolutionaries.
Tomorrow the Kanagawa Governor will send 500
coolies to assist in your evacuation of
Yokohama in accordance with clear warnings from the
gods, and according to wishes of the Emperor given to you
many times. When you return, if you return,
give us a long warning. Accommodation will be
provided for selected gai-jin at Deshima, in
the port of Nagasaki, from where, as in the past,
all future gai-jin trade and business will be
conducted. A cordial communication.

  "Tyrer!"
  He pretended not to hear, kept his back
to Sir William and accepted the receipt from the
Purser, the impatient men in the line calling out
with degrees of rudeness, "Hurry up for
God's sake, do you want all night
... hurry, there she is!"
  The empty cutter, returning from the Belle,
was docking. Tyrer noticed Jamie was not
aboard. The Bosun leaned out of his cabin and
bellowed, "All aboard wot's going aboard!"
  In the heightened bustle Maureen joined him.
"Phillip, when will Jamie be back?"
  "Certainly with the last ferry, if not before," he
said, not sure if Jamie had told her of their
scheme. "There's an hour or more yet."
  "Tyrer!"
  "Sorry, got to go. Yessir?" he called
out, took a deep breath, mentally girding his
loins and hurried off.
  "In half an hour, Phillip," Sir
William began, almost cross-eyed with rage,
"in half an hour I'll need you to translate
a reply for me, extremely bloody
accurately indeed."
  "Yes sir, by the way s--"
  "Go and find ... ah, there he is, thought I
saw him." One look at Sir William's
face was enough to cause the crowd to fall silent and
part for him instantly, all ears. "Pallidar,
get the Dragoons, I want you to deliver a
cordial communication to the Kanagawa
Governor--at once."
  "Tonight, sir?" Pallidar gaped at him, saw
the expression on his face and added hastily,
"Oh! Yessir, sorry sir, right away
Sir."
  his'scuse me, Sir William," Tyrer said
in a rush before Sir William could leave, "No
time to tell you before but I helped two Japanese
students aboard who wanted to travel, to visit
England, they saved my life last night, hope
that's all right."
  "That they saved your life? I wonder." The
eyes bored into him. "If you've turned travel
agent on Her Majesty's time, I suppose
there will be a satisfactory answer should I
require one. Pallidar, arrive in strength in
an hour and deliver my message rather rudely,
by God!" He stalked off.
  Pallidar blew his nose, his cold still bad.
"What the hell's up with him?" Tyrer leaned
closer and told him about the ultimatum. "My
God, no wonder. What bloody cheek!
Actually it's bloody good, now there'll be some
action, all this hanging around inflames
the General's neck along with his piles." He
laughed, more from nervousness than the old chestnut.
  At that moment, Hoag arrived puffing, still wearing
his operating frock coat, the sleeves and chest
stiff with ancient blood, and burdened with top
hat, suitcases and packages. "I thought I
was going to be late. What's the joke?"
  "You've plenty of time," Tyrer said and, with
Pallidar, wondered what was in Angelique's
letter that Sir William had witnessed, and Hoag
carried to Hong Kong in reply to the letter, also still
a mystery, given to Angelique when Hoag was
sure she was not bearing Malcolm's child. Since the
first day Hoag had arrived back, the outlines of
Tess's ultimatum were common knowledge and the subject
of heated, private debate. "Hope you have a
safe trip. It's India next, isn't it?"
  "Yes, I'll be there next month." The
ugly face split with a smile. "Can't wait,
come and visit me, you'll love it."
  Pallidar said, "India's my next posting,
in fact I've just been told, the Frontier,
Hindu Kush, Khyber Pass."
  Though he spoke lightly Pallidar
secretly hated the idea. Too many deaths in that
special hell, too many killings, a bullet
from nowhere, a dagger out of the night, wells
poisoned, no glory there, only slog and kill
and try to stay alive in that barren, festering rock
landscape where nothing grew but death. And yet
vital to the Empire, for there lay the historic
invasion route to British India, for Mongol,
Persian, or Russian hordes. A sick
premonition swept through him and he could not resist
adding, "No sea burials there, Doc."
  "No, none, not at all," Hoag replied
and, misreading him, put a warm, friendly arm on
him. "You're a good fellow, Settry, if I
can help in India I'm easy to find. You'll
love it, good luck!" He strode off to greet
Angelique and Gornt.
  "What was that about?" Tyrer asked. He had
noticed the sudden change in Pallidar.
  Pallidar shrugged, cursing his anxiety and
lapse and abrupt envy of Hoag. "Doc
Hoag told me he doesn't like sea
burials, said he was glad to miss Malcolm's
in Hong Kong." He smiled crookedly. After
he had reported to Sir William about
Hoag's curious behavior over the
coffins at Kanagawa that the Sergeant had
witnessed, on instructions and sworn to secrecy,
unobserved he had switched the coffins after checking
them. No difference between them that he could see. So the
coffin sent by Prancing Cloud to Hong Kong
had contained Malcolm Struan and the one Hoag,
Angelique, Jamie and Skye had buried was
that of the villager, as Sir William had
ordered.
  "Pity Malcolm got chopped," he said, his
voice raw. "Life's curious, eh? You never
know when it'll happen."
  Tyrer nodded, Pallidar's depression
unusual. Liking him, his own guard slid
away. "What's up, old man?"
  "Nothing. You were bloody lucky last night,
weren't you, getting out of--"
  Shadows rushed over Tyrer's face and
Pallidar swore at himself for his stupidity.
"Sorry, Phillip. Didn't mean to upset
you, don't know what's got into me tonight."
  "You heard about ... about ..."
  For the life of him Tyrer could not say
Fujiko's name, his grief scalding, driving him
down in quantum depths where he had never been
before. His mouth said, trying to sound brave, "When
something like that, something awful happens, my Old
Man used to ... I had a sister who got
measles and died when she was seven, such a pretty
little girl we all loved ... my Old Man
always used to say, "These things are sent to try us.
You cry and cry and ... and you pick yourself up and
say it was God's will and try not to hate Him.""
  He felt the tears running down his cheeks and
did not care. His feet took him away down to the
shore and there, alone with the surf and the sky and the
night, he thought about Fujiko truly,
remembering her with all his passion, then put her
into a little box and put the box safe beside his heart.

  Aboard Atlanta Belle Captain
Twomast was saying, "All right, Jamie,
I'll give them passage, whatever Mrs.
Struan decides, but you know her, she's not given
to largess."
  "Just give her my letter when you arrive Hong
Kong." Jamie had told Twomast the truth
about Otami and his cousin, not wanting to get his friend
into trouble, and had gone surety for their passage
money, there and back, if Tess did
not agree to his proposal: to advance it to them, with
prudent introductions in England and Scotland--
against a fifty-fifty joint venture he would form
and run to take advantage of anything he could
create from them on their return.
  He had written:

I know it's a long shot, Mrs. Struan, but
Otami is as smart as they come, well connected
as far as I can ascertain and represents the
future in Nippon. Should you not agree, please
take their passage money out of the most generous
golden gift you have given me. In the meantime
Albert MacStruan is doing well, your
property and buildings here were untouched in the
fire, and all is poised for a good future--I
will continue to help if he asks. Last, may I
say be careful of Brock's new manager,
Edward Gornt. He's a good, brave man but
a dangerous rival.

  "This is going to be expensive, Jamie,"
Twomast said. He was a lean, short,
hard-faced seaman, with dark hair and brown eyes
and leathery skin. "At least a hundred pounds.
Is it worth the risk?"
  "It's her ship, passage costs her nothing."
  "It's still expensive and she looks after the pence
as well as the pounds. Never mind, it's up to her.
I'll cash your sight draft in London town
if she doesn't foot the bill. You're sure
your Jappos understand they're to obey me?"
  "Yes. I've told them that on board you're
king, a daimyo. They're to obey you and stay
aboard until you disembark them in London. But
Johnny, treat them like nobs. You'll be
rewarded."
  Twomast laughed. "Yes, but in heaven. Never
mind, I owe you one or two over the years past
so I'll do it."
  "Thanks." Jamie looked around the cabin.
Small, a bunk, chart table, table to seat four,
neat, tough, seaworthy--like Johnny Twomast,
originally Norwegian, and a cousin of Sven
Orlov, the hunchback, who was Master of the
Struan fleet after Dirk Struan.
Atlanta Belle, a thousand-ton merchant
steamer, could sleep four first-class passengers,
ten second, fifty steerage with room for
substantial cargo. "Where will they
bunk?"
  "With the crew, where else?"
  "Can you give them a cabin, don't mind how
small."
  "We've a full house and they'll learn fast
with the crew, learn our ways, have to."
  "Give them a cabin at least until after
Hong Kong, I don't want either
recognized."
  Johnny Twomast said, "They can have the Third
Mate's cabin, it's got two bunks. Are
they armed, Jamie?"
  "Sure they're armed, they're samurai."
  "No arms, not samurai, by God."
  Jamie shrugged. "Tell them, but please
treat them as nobs, not natives, strange but
nobs, important Japanese, they are you
know."
  "Mister!" the Captain called out. "Send them
in!"
  Hiraga and Akimoto came in, well
briefed by Jamie.
  "Which one of you speaks English?"
  "I do, Anjin-sama. I Otami-sama."
  "Mr. McFay here is guarantor for you,
Otamisama, for your good behavior all the way
to London. You agree to obey me, to stay
aboard if I say so, to go ashore and come back
as I say, until London town, obey me as
if I was your chief, your daimyo?"
  "We agree do what Anjin-sama say,"
Hiraga said carefully.
  "Good, but no arms while aboard. I want
all swords, guns, knives. They'll be
returned to you." Twomast saw the flash of anger
and marked it. "You agree?"
  "But if men attack us?"
  "If my men attack you, use your fists
till I arrive. They'll be warned, fifty
lashes for each man if they start it. You don't
start it, understand?"
  "No, so sorry." Jamie explained how the
seamen would be tied to the rigging and flogged for
disobeying. Appalled by the cruelty, Hiraga
passed this on to Akimoto, then said, "But,
Anjin-sama, you no fear? If man free on
ship, after such insu'rt, no afraid this man
assassin you?"
  Johnny Twomast laughed. "He'd hang,
sure as God made little apples.
Mutiny's punishable by death. I'll order the
crew not to pick on you, you don't pick on them
--that's important too, understand?"
  "Understand, Anjin-sama," Hiraga said,
understanding only partially, his head aching.
  "Any trouble come to me. No fighting unless
you're attacked. Your weapons please."
Reluctantly Hiraga gave over their
bundled swords. And the derringer. "Mister!"
  The cabin door opened. "Yessir?"
  "These two'll have the Third Mate's berth,
I'll show 'em."
  Jamie got up and offered his hand to Hiraga.
"Safe journey, you can write anytime you like, and
to Phillip ... to Taira-sama. As I told
you I'll write you care of my bank, the
Hongkong Bank in the Mall. It's all in the
papers I've given you along with how to receive or
collect mail. Don't expect a reply for
four months. Good luck and safe return."
They shook hands, Jamie did the same with
Akimoto.
  "You two come with me," Twomast said. He led
the way down the corridor and opened a door.
"You bunk here and stay out of sight, Mr.
McFay doesn't want you recognized. After
Hong Kong it'll be easier." He closed the
door.

  In silence Hiraga and Akimoto looked
around. It was more of a cupboard than living
quarters. Barely enough room to stand together. A
gimballed oil lamp spluttered dully. Two
dirty bunks, one above the other against a
bulkhead, drawers below. Soiled straw
mattresses and wool blankets. Stench. Gum
boots, unwashed clothes scattered. Storm
mackintoshes hanging on pegs.
  "What are those for?" Akimoto asked,
numbed.
  "Some sort of clothing but so stiff, how would you
fight in those? I feel naked without swords."
  "I feel like death, not just naked." The deck
rolled under their feet and they heard men shouting
orders on deck and others chantying, preparing the
ship for sea, the engine loudly vibrating the deck
and bulkheads, increasing their discomfort. The
smallness of the space, and unpleasant smell of
coal smoke and oil, stale air and staler bedding
bore down on them. Again the deck
pitched as she swung on an anchor and Hiraga
lurched against the bunks, and sat on the lower one.
"Do you suppose we sleep on these?"
  "Where else?" Akimoto muttered.
Sharp-eyed, he moved the crumpled blanket
aside. All corners of the mattress were
splotched with colonies of bedbugs, alive and
dead, the rough canvas streaked with old blood where
generations had been squashed. He managed not to be
sick. "Let's go ashore," he croaked.
"I've had enough."
  "No," Hiraga said through his own dread. "We
have achieved a miracle, we have escaped the
Bakufu and Yoshi, and we're launched into the
enemy's heartland as guests, we can spy out their
secrets and learn how to destroy them."
  "Learn what? How to flog a man to death, how
to live in this cesspit for months? Did you see
how the Captain rudely walked off without
returning our bow. Come on ... even if I have
to swim ashore!" Akimoto grabbed the door
handle but Hiraga caught him by the shirt and
dragged him back. "No!"
  Akimoto snarled at him and broke free,
to crash against the door, with no room even
to struggle, then shouted, "You're not one of us,
you're gai-jin infected! Let me go, better
to die civilized than to live like this!"
  Suddenly Hiraga was petrified. Time stood
still. For the first time he completely understood the
enormity of what he had launched them into: the
outside, the barbarian world, away from everything
civilized, leaving everything worthwhile behind,
sonno-joi and Choshu and shishi and family,
leaving no wife and sons--ah my brave and so
wonderful Sumomo how you are missed, you would have
made my leaving easier but now ...
  His limbs began to tremble, heart hammering,
breath choking, every part of him screaming at him
to flee this hell that represented everything he
detested. If London was like this, anything was
better, anything.
  He shoved Akimoto out of the way and lunged
for the door. But stopped. "No," he gasped,
"I will bear this! I will! I'll bear it for
sonno-joi. We must for sonno-joi,
Cousin, we must bear it but whatever happens we will
die like samurai, we will make our death poems,
that's what we'll do, we'll make them now,
now, then nothing else matters in this
life ..."

  Ashore at the jetty the Bosun called out,
"Last call for Belle, all aboard!"
  "So, good luck, Edward, and a safe
return," Angelique said, still consumed with
melancholy, but with a little smile that lit up his
being. "Take care!"
  After leaving Sir William earlier, she had
finished her tears in the privacy of her suite--
so much to cry over these days, she thought, where do all
the tears come from, and yet, when the heartache has
past, clear thinking and clearheaded again. Once more
in control she had gone downstairs and, again in
privacy, had met Gornt. They had said
everything that needed to be said. The strength and confidence
and love he radiated had pushed away the bad.
  Edward is good for me, she thought, looking up
at him--not that he will ever replace my
Malcolm, that's different.
  "You all right now?" he asked.
  "Yes, thank you, my dear. Hurry back."
  He kissed her proffered hand. "Take care,
Ma'am." His glow made him even more boyish.
  "Don't forget." She had asked him to tell
Tess that she hoped, one day they could meet as
friends. "It's important."
  "Yes it is and I won't forget and I'll be
back before you know it." For those nearby he added
louder, "I'll see that your shopping list is
taken care of, never fear." A final little
pressure on her hand and he leapt onto the
slippery deck without a care, hung on with one
hand, last aboard. The Bosun tooted, shoved the
throttles Full Astern and backed into the chop.
Gornt waved and then, not wanting to be
indiscreet, went into the cabin.
  "Pretty girl," Hoag said, thoughtfully.
  "Yes, suh, a Belle to end Belles."
  Both men watched the jetty recede. "Have you
ever been to India, Edward?"
  "No, never have. You been to Paris?"
  "No, never. But India's the best place in
the world, best life in the world for Englishmen, you're
mostly that aren't you?" In his mind Hoag could see
himself arriving at her family house that was behind high
walls, brown and dusty outside but inside cool
and green, the sound of the water fountain mingling with
laughter that permeated the main house and the servants'
quarters, together with friendliness and the peace
possessed by everyone because of their utter belief in
birth and death and rebirth, in never-ending
succession, until through the mercy of the Infinite they
would reach Nirvana, the Place of Heavenly
Peace. Arjumand will be there, he thought, oh how I
hope I can find my way there too.
  His eyes focused on the jetty, on
Angelique and others, all people he would
probably never see again. Now Angelique
waved a last time then strolled over to Maureen
Ross who was waiting by the lamp. I hope they
become friends, he thought, wondering about them. In a
moment, they and the jetty became part of the night.
Angelique's correct to bend to Tess, he
thought, not that she had any option. Absently his
fingers made sure her affidavit was safe in his
pocket.
  Sad about Malcolm, tragic. Poor
Malcolm, diligently working all his life for
something he would never have, would never be. Malcolm
Struan, the tai-pan who never truly was
--all his life like a snow-blind man in a
blizzard searching for a white tent that was never there.
  "Sad about Malcolm, don't you think?" But
Gornt was no longer beside him. He looked around
and saw he had gone on deck and, his back
to Yokohama, was watching the Belle ahead,
hatless, the wind ruffling his hair.
  Why the smile, and what's behind it? he asked
himself. So hard and yet ... Something strange about
that young man. Is he a king in the making or a
man bent on regicide?

  Most people on the jetty had wandered off.
Angelique was beside Maureen near the lamp,
watching the Belle and disappearing cutter. Soon
they were alone but for Chen and Vargas who were talking
quietly with one another, waiting to unload the
cutter, should it be necessary and, unasked, to chaperone the
two women.
  "Maureen ..." Angelique glanced at
her. Her lovely smile faded, noticing how
unhappy her newfound friend looked. "What's the
matter?"
  "Nothing. Well, no, it's ... really,
dinna concern yoursel'. It's, it's just that I
haven't seen Jamie all day, he's been
busy and, and I had something important ..." The
words trailed off.
  "I'll wait with you if you like. Even
better, Maureen, why not come with me? Let's
wait in my suite and watch from my window.
We'll see the cutter in plenty of time to meet
her."
  "I think I'd ... well, I think I'd rather
wait here."
  Angelique firmly took her arm. "What
is it? What's the matter, can I help?"
  "No, I din'na think so, dear
Angelique. It's, it's just that, it's just that
..." Maureen hesitated again, then stammered,
"oh God, I din'na want to burden you but
his, Jamie's, his, his mistress, came
to see me this afternoon."
  "From the Yoshiwara?"
  "Yes. She came to kowtow, to bow, she said, and
tell me not to worry because she's looked after him
perfectly and she wanted to ask in future should
she present her bill to me monthly or
yearly."
  Angelique's mouth dropped open. "She
did?"
  "Yes." Maureen looked green under the oil
light and stuttered, "She also said that if there was
anything I wanted to know about ... about, about
"Jami" as she called him, ugh!, about his bed
habits, pos--positions and so on, as I was a
virgin and wouldn't know these things, she'd be happy
to oblige in detail because she was a professional
of Second Rank and promised to give me a
picture book called a "pillow book" and
she would mark his, his specialties but not
to worry because Jami was well practiced and his
... his, she called it his One-eyed Monk was
in perfect order. There, now you know it all!"
  Angelique was flabbergasted. "Mon
Dieu, you poor dear, how awful! But ... but
she speaks English too?"
  "No, an almost incoherent mixture of
gibberish and pidgin and some of Jamie's words but
I understood her key points perfectly well
indeed. It it seems she's, she's been his doxy
for a year or more. She was tiny, no' at all
pretty, no' five foot and I said, I
didn'a know what to say so I remarked on her
size, how small she was and the huzzy, the huzzy
guffawed and said, "P'renti big 'nuff,
Jami tai-tai, on back fit awe' same,
heya? You 'rucky womans.""
  "Oh, mon Dieu!"
  "Q. What do I do?"
  Angelique found her own head buzzing. "You
could ... no that wouldn't do ..."
  "Perhaps I could ... no I canna'. It's
too much ..."
  "What if you ..." Angelique shook her
head. Impotently she stared at her and at that
moment Maureen looked at her, each seeing herself
in the other, the same shock, revulsion,
repugnance, contempt, fury written clearly
on both faces. For a moment they were frozen, then
Angelique snickered, in a second Maureen
did the same and then they were choked with laughter.
  Chen and Vargas peered across at them, the peals
of laughter mixing with the waves on the shore and those
that battered the pilings. Angelique wiped away
these, the first, good, laughter tears she had had in
such a long time. "His One-eyed ..." Again they
were convulsed, shrieking with laughter until their
stomachs hurt and they hung on to one another.
  As suddenly as the laughing fit arrived it went
away. An ache remained. "It's funny,
Maureen, but not funny at all."
  "Yes. Not funny," Maureen said heavily.
"I feel ... I want to go home now. I
thought I could deal with the Yoshiwara--Jamie's no
different from other men--but I canna', I know that
now. I canna' face this life where, where the
Yoshiwara is and will ever be and like it or no',
Angelique, in a year or two the bairns, the
children, arrive and a few years after he'll think us
old, whoever he is--and we will be old, our hair
will be grey and teeth fall out and whoever he is he
will turn away. A woman's lot is no' a
happy one. I wish I was aboard Atlanta
Belle now, going home, no' here, no' here.
I'm going home anyway, soon as I can.
I've decided."
  "Think about it, don't tell him tonight."
  "It's better to say it tonight. That's ... it's
better."
  Angelique hesitated. "I'll wait
till we see the cutter, then I'll leave."
  "Thank you. I'll be sorry to leave you, now
that we've met. I've never had a real friend."
Maureen put her arm in hers, and looked back
at Atlanta Belle.

  "Ayeeyah," Chen was whispering disgustedly in
Four Village dialect that he and
Vargas spoke fluently. "Why can't those two
whores be sensible and wait indoors until the
cutter arrives, then we don't have to wait in the
cold either."
  "Jami won't be pleased to hear you call her
that!"
  "Fortunately he doesn't speak this
dialect, or even Cantonese, and anyway
I wouldn't call her whore in front of him or
any foreign devil--though that's what we call
all their women as you know--nor would I use such
blunt words around them. I'd use "Morning
Flower" or one of a thousand other names which we both
know means "whore" but foreign devils think
means "Morning Flower."" Chen chortled,
warm in his long padded jacket. He looked up
at the sky as the moon came briefly through the
overcast. "That Morning Flower thinks she'll be
Jami tai-tai." Again he chortled. "She
never will be."
  "No, not after today," Vargas said gloomily.
"She's the right size for him, time he was married and
it would have been good to have children here." Vargas missed
his own, six of them, that he had left with his two
wives in Macao until he could afford a house
of his own here. "What about Missee-tai-tai and
this Shanghai Gornt? Will he increase her
money?"
  "If he does it will be for his benefit not hers.
What I want to know is what's in those papers?"
  "What papers?"
  "The ones Lun saw when Willum tai-pan
was dozing by his fire. The ones from Long Pointed
Nose. Dew neh loh moh that Lun can't
read French. Willum tai-pan was in plenty
shock so Lun said."
  "What would Pointed Nose send Willum from
the grave?"
  Chen shrugged. "Trouble for Missee-tai-tai.
Perhaps it was about Dark of the Moon, eh?"
  "That's only a rumor."
  Chen said nothing, keeping that secret as Noble
House Chen had ordered after Malcolm's death.
"Whatever happens, Tess tai-tai will grind
Missee-tai-tai and the Shanghai foreign
devil into dust."
  "Oh? What have you heard?"
  Chen rolled his eyes. "Tess tai-tai is
tai-pan now, that's what Noble House Chen
says--he told us in the last mail and
to beware. Did you ever hear of an Empress
giving away power once she's got it? Any
woman for that matter? Never in all our five
hundred centuries of history. She's
tai-pan now according to Noble House Chen and he should
know."
  "I thought Shanghai Albert was to be
tai-pan."
  "Never. She'll grind him into dust too--
Old Green-eyed Devil forced him and his brother
on the Noble House. Rumor is Tess
tai-tai hates them because they are secret
bastards of that foreign devil missionary's
daughter--the one of Many Lovers by Green-eyed
Devil himself."
  "Harbor Master Glessing's wife? Mary
Sinclair? Never!"
  "It could be true, she made One-Leg
Glessing wear a green hat a dozen times."
  "Made him a cuckold? That's another
legend," Vargas said, guarding her reputation like
all her ex-lovers. Now she was in her forties,
used, but still as hungry as ever he thought, the
opposite to Tess Struan who abominates
fornication and drove her husband Culum to drink and
other women. "Tess tai-tai should have married the
tai-pan--and not his son Culum. He could have
lubricated her majestically which was her real
lack, and still have more than enough left for Second
Wife May-may and Third Wife Yin Hsi
as well."
  "True," Chen said, "then we'd be strong with
lots more sons to follow, and not weak and fleeing from
One-eye Devil Brock." He added
ominously, "Noble House Chen is worried."
  "Sad that Number One Son Malcolm died
as he did."
  "The gods were out that day," Chen said wisely.
"Listen, you kowtow to the foreign devil god, has
he told you why gods spend more time out than
watching over our affairs?"
  "Gods are gods, they only talk to one
another ... look, Belle's leaving ..."

  Maureen said, "Atlanta Belle on her
way, Angelique."
  God speed, Angelique thought, squinting
against the slight wind, the ship only a vague
shape.
  "And there's the cutter."
  "Where? My goodness your eyes are sharp, I can
hardly see her." Angelique gave
Maureen's arm a friendly squeeze. "I'm
sure you and Jamie will ..." She saw the color
had gone out of her. "Don't worry, Maureen,
it will be all right, I'm sure."
  Maureen muttered. "I dinna think I can
face him now."
  "Then ... then you run off, I'll say you had
a headache and will see him tomorrow that will give you time
to think, it will be better tomorrow."
  "Tonight, tomorrow, my mind's made up," Maureen
said.
  Both women watched the cutter's riding lights
becoming steadily more visible. In a little while they
could make out the tall figure of Jamie in the
cabin lights. He was alone.
  Angelique said, "'night, Maureen,
I'll see you tomorrow."
  "No. Please stay, I canna' do it
alone. Please stay."
  The cutter was barely fifty metres from the
jetty. They saw Jamie lean out of the window and
wave. Maureen did not return the salute.
Behind them the oil lamps were fine along the
promenade, and in the big houses and warehouses that
had remained untouched. Somewhere men were singing. Over
at the French Legation Vervene was playing the
flute. Maureen's eyes were fixed on the
approaching man. Again he waved, then swung on
deck. "Maureen!" he hollered, clearly so
happy to see her.
  Angelique glanced back at her and saw
Maureen's eyes soften and knew she was
forgotten. Rightly so, she thought and smiled to herself.
Maureen will weep and rave and swear she's leaving
but she won't, she'll make him suffer, but she will
forgive him and never forget and stay--she'll stay
because she loves him--how silly we women are.
  Quietly, unnoticed, she walked away,
glad to be alone.
  The night was pleasant. In the bay the bells
were sounding the hour. Out to sea, beyond the headland her
emissary was launched aboard Atlanta
Belle on his voyage of conquest, a voyage
of no return for both of them. And for the enemy, the
Woman of Hong Kong.
  Edward will squeeze that awful woman and we'll
live happy ever after, we'll spend more than two
months every second year in Paris,
we'll summer in Provence and I will start a
dynasty--with five thousand guineas of my own,
I'm an heiress, and every sou I spend will
remind me of her.
  How silly of Edward to think I would ever, could
ever be her friend, would ever want to be.
  That woman's vile. I will never forgive her
for the things she did and wrote. Illegitimate,
eh? I will never forget that, and we will be revenged,
my Malcolm and I, for all the anguish she
caused us, him and me. We will be revenged on that
hag.
  I like that name, she told herself, smiling. That's
one of my new secrets. That's what I knew
she was from the first moment I met her, and during the
few times we met and times we dined, barely
talking to me, always disapproving of me, much as I
tried. She's a hag. Even though she's
thirty-seven. She is and always will be Hag
Struan to me.
  Angelique was eighteen and a few days over
six months old and she walked into the Struan
foyer under the entwined Red Lion of Scotland and
Green Dragon of China and up the great
staircase and into her own suite. There she bolted
the door and then, so happily, went to bed--
to sleep snug.






















                                 
  Seven days later, at his request, Yoshi
met Sir William and the Ministers at
Kanagawa and soothed them, content that Anjo had
again fallen into his trap to use a big stick that
was no stick at all--though equally astonished the
gai-jin had not sailed away from the devastation. His
salve was to be a meeting with the Sh@ogun, as soon
as the Sh@ogun returned.
  And when would that be? Sir William asked,
and he replied, I will arrange it quickly,
overruling the tair@o if need be, he's so
sick poor man, though still tair@o.
Meanwhile I trust the information I require
for our possible future accords will be ready
soon and that my counsel will be considered?
  Forthwith H.m.s. Pearl was sent
to Kagoshima with a formal demand to Sanjiro for an
apology, reparations and the murderers handed over or
identified. Sanjiro dismissed it as
impertinent. The following week, with Sir
William and his staff aboard the flagship, the
battle squadron sailed--H.m.s.
Eurylus, 35 guns, Pearl, 21,
Perseus, 21, Racehorse, 14,
Havoc, Coquette, and the paddle sloop
Argus, 9--and shortly anchored in the neck
of Kagoshima Bay, out of range of the shore
batteries that were protected in fourteen forts on
both sides of the bay. The weather turned bad.
  As conditions worsened, Sanjiro
vacillated. For four days. At dawn on the
fifth day, the rain and storm heavy, three
foreign-built Satsuma-owned steamers anchored
off the town were seized and scuttled, and some soundings
taken. At noon all shore batteries commenced
firing and Admiral Ketterer gave orders
to engage. In line ahead, the flagship leading, the
fleet steamed into the uncharted waters. As each
came into range of the forts the ships poured
broadside after broadside into them, the returning
fire much heavier than expected.
  An hour after the battle had begun
Eurylus swerved out of line. Unwittingly
she had been steered between a fort and a target area the
shore gunners had ranged to a nicety, and a round
shot had taken off the heads of her Captain and
Commander on the bridge, standing beside Ketterer and
Sir William, and a 10-inch shell exploded
on the deck killing another seven sailors and
wounding an officer. Pearl led in
her place. Near sunset Perseus went
aground under the guns of a fort but Pearl dragged
her off without loss.
  The engagement continued until sunset.
Several forts had been damaged, many cannon
destroyed, some magazines blown up and rockets
fired into Kagoshima. No ships lost, the only
deaths so far those aboard the flagship. That night
Kagoshima burned as Yokohama had burned.
The storm increased.
  At dawn, with no letup in the foul weather,
the dead were given their sea burial and
re-engagement ordered. Eurylus led. That
night the fleet once more anchored out of range,
all ships intact, morale high with plenty of
ammunition in reserve. Kagoshima was gutted,
most batteries damaged. At dawn, in
gale-force winds and driving rain, to the disgust of
most aboard and over Sir William's
protests, Ketterer ordered the fleet to return
to Yokohama. Though far out of range, a few
shore guns still fired defiantly at their wake.
  Ketterer claimed it a victory, the city
had been burned, Sanjiro humbled and, most
important, the fleet was unharmed--weather had
made his decision necessary, he maintained.
  In Ky@oto, the moment Ogama of Choshu
heard that Kagoshima was destroyed--with Sanjiro
reported killed--he launched a surprise
night coup, code name Crimson Sky,
to regain total control of the Gates, lured
into another trap of Yoshi's design. At
once Yodo of Tosa and all fence-sitting
daimyos joined with the Sh@ogunate against Ogama
--better a weak Sh@ogunate guarding the
Gates than a single, all-powerful Ogama.
So the coup was put down, Ogama forced out of
Ky@oto to retreat to Shimonoseki and his
Straits, there to lick his wounds, swearing
vengeance, particularly on his er/while ally
Yoshi. And to prepare for war.
  For Nippon nothing had been solved. Nor
had Sanjiro been killed--more disinformation spread
by Yoshi's spies. But that did not matter,
Yoshi knew he had made a giant step forward
towards capturing the future: now he had sole
though tenuous possession of the Gates, Ogama was
banished, Kagoshima destroyed, Sh@ogun
Nobusada returning to Yedo, without his
Princess, convinced that Ky@oto was
unsafe for his person, shishi were almost
exterminated, Anjo not long for this earth--and,
temporarily, the gai-jin tamed.
  But a month or so later, Sanjiro's
emissaries came from Satsuma to Sir
William in Yokohama and sued for peace.
Sanjiro admitted he was in the wrong, paid the
indemnity, named the killers, swore to be friends
to gai-jin, blamed the decadent Sh@ogunate for
all problems, and invited gai-jin to his
rebuilt Kagoshima to trade, to discuss
modernization in all its facets and, amongst other
matters, "Lord Sanjiro wants you to know
Satsuma is an ancient sea power and should have a
navy such as yours. He is rich and can pay in
gold or silver or coal what is necessary for
Ing'erish ships and Ing'erish instructors ..."
  To his chagrin Yoshi heard about the offer
almost at once from his spy Inejin and was utterly
displeased. This was not planned for, never conceived and
changed the balance of power.
  Never mind, he thought grimly, that particular
sunset. He was in his eyrie in Yedo
Castle's keep, looking out over the city, the
sky streaked blood-red, fires here and there
lighting the coming of night. Never mind, gods play
tricks on us, if there are gods. Gods or
no gods, do not matter, that is what makes
life what it is. Perhaps I will win, perhaps not.
Karma. I will remember the Legacy. And have
patience. That is enough.
  No, never enough!
  Deliberately he opened the compartment and
recalled Koiko in all her beauty, all the
good times they had had and all the laughter. This
gladdened him and calmed him and the thought of her led at
length to Meikin and her death wish: "A bath and
clean clothes. Please." He smiled, happy
that he had granted it--but only because of her good
manners.
  "In this life," he said with a chuckle to the
evening air, "in this World of Tears, you need a
sense of humor, neh?"






           PRINCIPAL CHARACTERS

              The Gai-jin

MALCOLM STRUAN, 20, eldest son and
    heir apparent of
CULUM STRUAN, 42, present tai-pan of
    STRUAN'S, the Noble House, son of
    DIRK STRUAN, founder of the company, and
TESS STRUAN, 37, his wife, daughter of
    TYLER BROCK
GORDON CHEN, 48, "Illustrious Chen,"
    compradore of STRUAN'S in Hong Kong,
    an illegitimate son of DIRK
    STRUAN
JAMIE MCFAY, 39, manager of
    STRUAN'S in the Japans
MAUREEN ROSS, 28, his fianc@ee
DR. RONALD HOAG, 50, the STRUAN
    family physician

TYLER BROCK, 72, tai-pan and founder of
    Brock and Sons
SIR MORGAN BROCK, 48, his son,
    TESS STRUAN'S stepbrother
NORBERT GREYFORTH, 39, head of
    BROCK'S in the Japans

SIR WILLIAM AYLESBURY, 47,
    British Minister to the Japans
DR. GEORGE BABCOTT, 28, Deputy
    Minister and surgeon
PHILLIP TYRER, 21, diplomat and
    apprentice Japanese interpreter
ADMIRAL CHARLES KETTERER, 46, commander
    of the British Fleet
LT. JOHN MARLOWE, 28, captain of the
    21-gun steam frigate, H.m.s.
    Pearl, presently aide-de-camp
    to KETTERER
SETTRY PALLIDAR, 24, Captain of the
    Dragoons
DMITRI SYBORODIN, 38, American
    trader of Cossack descent
EDWARD GORNT, 27, gentleman,
    Shanghai trader, from Virginia
HEATHERLY SKYE, 41, the only solicitor
    in the Japans
HENRI BONAPARTE SERATARD, 41, French
    Minister to the Japans
ANDR`E EDOUARD PONCIN, 38,
    trader, secret spy for the French Legation
COUNT ALEXI ZERGEYEV, 35, Tsarist
    Minister to the Japans
ANGELIQUE RICHAUD, 18, beloved of
    MALCOLM STRUAN, daughter of GUY
    RICHAUD, French China trader, ward of the
    French Minister

             The Japanese

LORD TORANAGA YOSHI, 26, descendent
    of SH@OGUN TORANAGA, member of the
    Council of Elders, Guardian of the
    Heir, the boy Sh@ogun
KOIKO, 22, Tayu, the highest possible
    rank of geisha, his ai-jin (love
    person)
LADY HISAKO, 29, his wife
INEJIN, 42, innkeeper and his spymaster
MISAMOTO, 31, fisherman, convict, his
    make-believe samurai, a secret
    American-speaking interpreter

SH@OGUN NOBUSADA, 16, the 14th
    Toranaga Sh@ogun
PRINCESS YAZU, 16, his wife, stepsister
    of Emperor Komei
LORD ANJO, 46, daimyo of Kii, head
    of the Council of Elders
LORD SANJIRO, 42, daimyo of Satsuma
KATSUMATA, 36, his most trusted advisor,
    also called the Raven, and secret head of the
    shishi
LORD OGAMA, 28, daimyo of Choshu
LORD HIRO, 28, daimyo of Tosa
WAKURA, 46, Lord Chancellor to the
    Imperial Court in Ky@oto

MEIKIN, 44, KOIKO'S mama-san of
    Yedo's House of Wisteria
RAIKO, 42, mama-san of Yokohama's
    House of Three Carp
FUJIKO, 17, courtesan, sought
    by PHILLIP TYRER
NEMI, 23, courtesan, JAMIE
    MCFAY'S ai-jin
HINODEH, 24, courtesan, ANDR`E
    PONCIN'S ai-jin

                                 
the shishi (persons of courage), cells of
    revolutionary samurai idealists,
    fanatically xenophobic and anti-gai-jin:
  HIRAGA, 22, leader of all Choshu
    shishi, also called UKIYA, NAKAMA,
    OTAMI
  AKIMOTO, 24, of Choshu, his cousin
  ORI, 17, leader of a Satsuma cell
  SHORIN, 19, of Satsuma, his deputy
  SUMOMO, 16, SHORIN'S sister, also
    shishi, HIRAGA'S wife-to-be

               THE END













 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
